ALL RIGHT,
WE'RE GOING TO GET STARTED
HERE.
SEVEN 01 WELCOME TO THE TUESDAY
JANUARY 7TH 20 TWENTY FIVE
REGULAR MEETING OF THE ANN
ARBOR PLANNING COMMISSION FOR
DETAILED INFORMATION ON MEETING
PROCEDURES, PLEASE REVIEW THE
FULL PRINTED MEETING AGENDA
PROVIDED.
>> MR. LEONARD, WILL YOU PLEASE
CALL THE ROLL TO BE MY
PLEASURE.
COMMISSIONER LEE HERE.
MR. WHITE HERE, COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT HERE.
>> COMMISSIONER EVANS,
COMMISSIONER DISH HERE.
>> COMMISSIONER MILLS HERE.
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE HERE.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS HERE.
COMMISSIONER NORTON HERE YOU
HAVE AS MANY AS YOU NEED.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
>> ALL RIGHT.
THE AGENDA MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
MAY I HAVE A MOTION TO APPROVE
WHITE SECONDED BY MR. MILLS ALL
THE AGENDA MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION
WHITE SECONDED BY MR. MILLS ALL
PLEASE SAY I I ANY OPPOSED
THOSE IN FAVOR OF THE MOTION
SEEING NONE THE MOTION CARRIES
PLEASE SAY I I ANY OPPOSED
I MEAN I HAVE A MOTION TO
SEEING NONE THE MOTION CARRIES
APPROVE THE MINUTES THE
I MEAN I HAVE A MOTION TO
DECEMBER 3RD TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
APPROVE THE MINUTES THE
MEETING MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
DECEMBER 3RD TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
WETHERBEE AND SECONDED BY
MEETING MOVE BY COMMISSIONER
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH ALTHOUGH IS
WETHERBEE AND SECONDED BY
THERE ANY DISCUSSION ALL THOSE
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH ALTHOUGH IS
IN FAVOR SAY I ANY OPPOSED
THERE ANY DISCUSSION ALL THOSE
SEEING NONE.
IN FAVOR SAY I ANY OPPOSED
>> THE MOTION CARRIES NEXT UP
SEEING NONE.
OUR REPORTS TO THE PLANNING
>> THE MOTION CARRIES NEXT UP
COMMISSION AND WRITTEN
OUR REPORTS TO THE PLANNING
COMMUNICATIONS.
COMMISSION AND WRITTEN
>> WE WILL START WITH COUNCIL
COMMUNICATIONS.
MEMBER.
>> WE WILL START WITH COUNCIL
THANK YOU VERY MUCH CHAIR LEE.
MEMBER.
I'M DELIGHTED TO REPORT TO YOU
THANK YOU VERY MUCH CHAIR LEE.
ALL THAT THE ALTERATIONS TO
I'M DELIGHTED TO REPORT TO YOU
FENCE'S WERE APPROVED AS WERE
ALL THAT THE ALTERATIONS TO
THE ALTERATIONS TO WHATEVER WE
FENCE'S WERE APPROVED AS WERE
WERE CALLING THEM BONUSES OR
THE ALTERATIONS TO WHATEVER WE
REBATES FOR INCLUSION
WERE CALLING THEM BONUSES OR
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
REBATES FOR INCLUSION
THAT'S THAT ALL HAPPENED LAST
OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND
NIGHT AND I DON'T I SUPPOSE
THAT'S THAT ALL HAPPENED LAST
THERE WAS THE DECEMBER MEETING
NIGHT AND I DON'T I SUPPOSE
THAT I SHOULD UPDATE YOU ABOUT
THERE WAS THE DECEMBER MEETING
BUT THAT IS LONG GONE ON.
THAT I SHOULD UPDATE YOU ABOUT
>> GOT IT.
BUT THAT IS LONG GONE ON.
THANK YOU.
>> GOT IT.
WE'LL GO TO MANAGER'S REPORT.
THANK YOU.
>> I WAS SO LAST YEAR.
WE'LL GO TO MANAGER'S REPORT.
YEAH.
>> I WAS SO LAST YEAR.
THERE WAS ALSO AN AMENDMENT TO
YEAH.
THE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT FOR
THERE WAS ALSO AN AMENDMENT TO
ELEVEN FORTY BROADWAY AS
THE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT FOR
PARTIES AS PART OF A REVISED
ELEVEN FORTY BROADWAY AS
PLAN FOR THE BEAKMAN ON
PARTIES AS PART OF A REVISED
BROADWAY THEY VOLUNTARILY
PLAN FOR THE BEAKMAN ON
OFFERED SIX ADDITIONAL
BROADWAY THEY VOLUNTARILY
AFFORDABLE UNITS THOSE
OFFERED SIX ADDITIONAL
OF MEMORIALIZED REVISED
AFFORDABLE UNITS THOSE
AFFORDABILITY AGREEMENT LAST
OF MEMORIALIZED REVISED
EVENING AS WELL.
AFFORDABILITY AGREEMENT LAST
>> I'M PLANNING SIDE STAY
EVENING AS WELL.
TUNED.
>> I'M PLANNING SIDE STAY
I I AM NOT AND KELLY AND I
TUNED.
BELIEVE THAT THERE IS A CHANCE
I I AM NOT AND KELLY AND I
THAT THE WORKING SESSION MAY BE
BELIEVE THAT THERE IS A CHANCE
CANCELED NEXT WEEK.
THAT THE WORKING SESSION MAY BE
SO JUST STAY TUNED ON YOUR
CANCELED NEXT WEEK.
EMAILS AND WE WILL CONFIRM ONE
SO JUST STAY TUNED ON YOUR
WAY OR ANOTHER.
EMAILS AND WE WILL CONFIRM ONE
I DON'T HAVE ANYTHING TEED UP
WAY OR ANOTHER.
FOR THAT BUT ON THE HORIZON I
I DON'T HAVE ANYTHING TEED UP
DO WANT TO TAKE THIS
FOR THAT BUT ON THE HORIZON I
OPPORTUNITY WHILE I'M HERE.
DO WANT TO TAKE THIS
I'LL BE RETURNING TO SEE YOU ON
OPPORTUNITY WHILE I'M HERE.
LATE JANUARY ONE OF THINGS IS
I'LL BE RETURNING TO SEE YOU ON
WE'RE GOING TO BE BRINGING A
LATE JANUARY ONE OF THINGS IS
COUPLE OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
WE'RE GOING TO BE BRINGING A
QUESTIONS THAT WE REALLY NEED
COUPLE OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SOME GUIDANCE FROM YOU AND
QUESTIONS THAT WE REALLY NEED
SUBSEQUENTLY AT A WORKING
SOME GUIDANCE FROM YOU AND
SESSION OF THE CITY COUNCIL
SUBSEQUENTLY AT A WORKING
BEFORE WE GET TO DRAFTING SOME
SESSION OF THE CITY COUNCIL
SEGMENTS OF THE PLAN.
BEFORE WE GET TO DRAFTING SOME
>> SO I'M REALLY LOOKING
SEGMENTS OF THE PLAN.
FORWARD TO THAT CONVERSATION
>> SO I'M REALLY LOOKING
COMING UP AS WELL.
FORWARD TO THAT CONVERSATION
>> GREAT.
COMING UP AS WELL.
THANK YOU.
>> GREAT.
DO OTHER COMMISSIONERS,
THANK YOU.
OFFICERS OR COMMITTEE LIAISON
DO OTHER COMMISSIONERS,
HAVE ANYTHING TO REPORT?
OFFICERS OR COMMITTEE LIAISON
ALL RIGHT.
HAVE ANYTHING TO REPORT?
SEE NONE WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS
ALL RIGHT.
ARE INCLUDED IN TODAY'S PACKET
SEE NONE WRITTEN COMMUNICATIONS
SO WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
ARE INCLUDED IN TODAY'S PACKET
PUBLIC COMMENT.
SO WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
>> THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PUBLIC COMMENT.
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP THE
>> THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
THREE MINUTES ON ISSUES NOT
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP THE
LISTED AS A PUBLIC HEARING.
THREE MINUTES ON ISSUES NOT
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
LISTED AS A PUBLIC HEARING.
PRESENT AND THEN REMOTE
WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PRESENT AND THEN REMOTE
.
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE IF ON
.
THE PHONE OR USE RAISED HAND
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE IF ON
FEATURE AND ZOOM FOR PHONE
THE PHONE OR USE RAISED HAND
ACCESS PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN
FEATURE AND ZOOM FOR PHONE
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE
FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND UNDER MEETING ID
NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE
FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX CITY STAFF
WILL IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE
LAST THREE DIGITS THEIR PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME FOR ZOOME
USERS YOU'LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK AND PLEASE MOVE
TO A QUIET AREA AND MUTE ANY
BACKGROUND NOISE SO THAT WE CAN
HEAR YOU CLEARLY FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS PLEASE STATE YOUR
NAME AND ADDRESS AT THE
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS.
IS THERE ANYONE WHO WOULD LIKE
TO PRESENT THAT?
>> WE'D LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
TIME.
WELCOME.
GOOD EVENING.
THANK YOU.
OF COURSE MY NAME'S LARRY
SCHMIDT.
I LIVE AT EIGHTY FIVE HUNDRED
AND FALLINGWATER DRIVE SELFIE
IN MICHIGAN.
I AM THE CHAIR OF THE WOLFPACK
CLIMATE ACTION TEAM.
FOR THOSE OF YOU NOT FAMILIAR
THE WOLF PACK IS NETWORK
OF ABOUT ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY
PEOPLE HERE IN ANN ARBOR.
ALL ENVIRONMENTALISTS WORKING
ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROJECTS.
THE CLIMATE ACTION TEAM IS
TAKING ON JUST AS IT SAYS
CLIMATE ACTION AND WE FOR THE
PAST YEAR WE'VE BEEN WORKING ON
BUILDING DECARBONIZATION AND
ZERO EMISSION PROJECTS TO TRY
TO GET ALL BUILDINGS BEING ZERO
EMISSION THERE IS SOME WE'VE
BEEN TALKING TO A NUMBER
OF DEVELOPERS.
WE ACTUALLY HAD A WORKSHOP LAST
NOVEMBER ABOUT 30 DEVELOPERS,
LOCAL DEVELOPERS CAME AND
TALKED ABOUT THIS WHOLE TOPIC
OF BUILDING DECARBONIZATION.
THERE WAS SOME CONCERN AT THE
MEETING RAISED BY SOME
DEVELOPERS ABOUT DTES CAPACITY
TO SERVICE ALL ELECTRIC
BUILDINGS, ESPECIALLY IF YOU
START PUTTING IN CAR CHARGERS
AND YOU GO WITH HEAT PUMPS AND
INDUCTION COKE TOPS AND ALL
OF THAT.
SO WE DECIDED TO TRACK THAT
DOWN AND FOLLOW UP AND FIND OUT
FROM WHAT THE TRUE SITUATION
WAS IN TERMS OF THEIR CAPACITY
AND YOU'LL BE GLAD TO KNOW THAT
AFTER EXTENSIVE DISCUSSIONS
WITH THEM IT'S CLEAR THAT THEY
DO NOT HAVE ANY CAPACITY ISSUES
EITHER IN THE GENERATION OR
DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRICITY.
THEY ARE PLANNING FOR AN ALL
ELECTRIC FUTURE.
THEY YOU KNOW, THEY PROVIDE A
METHOD OF SERVICE DOCUMENT TO
ANY DEVELOPER AND ITS DEVELOPER
COMES AND SAYS WELL YOU CAN'T
PROVIDE THE CAPACITY THEN YOU
REALLY SHOULD ASK THEM FOR THE
METHOD SERVICE LETTER THAT WILL
STATE HOW DTI IS GOING TO SERVE
THEIR ELECTRIC NEEDS FOR ALL
ELECTRIC BUILDINGS.
THE ONLY ISSUE IS BUILDING
OWNER HAS TO PROVIDE ENOUGH
ROOM FOR THE TRANSFORMERS
NECESSARY TRANSFORMERS IN THE
BUILDING.
THEY HAVE TO BE DESIGNED SO
THERE'S ENOUGH ROOM FOR THOSE
TRANSFORMERS.
SO I'D LIKE TO ADVOCATE FOR THE
PLANNING COMMISSION TO REALLY
PUSH FOR ALL ELECTRIC TO GET
RID OF NATURAL GAS EVERY
RESIDENTIAL UNIT THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET IF NATURAL GAS
EMITS ABOUT OVER A TON OF CO2
INTO THE ATMOSPHERE FOR ITS
LIFETIME.
SO IT'S VERY ESSENTIAL THAT WE
MOVE ON THIS ISSUE AND
ENCOURAGE ALL AS DEVELOPERS ARE
DOING.
MOST DEVELOPERS ARE BUILDING
ALL ELECTRIC BUILDINGS WHICH IS
A GOOD THING.
BUT DTG CAPACITY ISSUES ARE NOT
AN ISSUE IS THE POINT I'M
MAKING.
>> SO THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
PERFECT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE PRESENT
THAT WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT
THIS TIME?
>> ALL RIGHT.
SEE UM DO WE HAVE ANY REMOTE
CALLERS, MR. HUNTER?
WE HAVE CALLERS BUT NOBODY
INDICATING A DESIRE TO ADDRESS
THE COMMISSION AT THIS TIME.
>> OK, LET'S GIVE IT TWO, THREE
SECONDS.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
I WILL CLOSE THE FIRST PUBLIC
HEARING COMMENT.
>> WE ARE GOING TO GO TO PUBLIC
HEARINGS SCHEDULED FOR THE NEXT
BUSINESS MEETING AND SO WE'LL
GO TO STAFF FOR TALKING ABOUT
NONCONFORMING TAX AMENDMENTS.
>> MR. HUNTER?
YES, AS I INDICATED, WE'VE GOT
TWO ITEMS ON THE JANUARY TWENTY
THIRD AGENDA NOTE I BELIEVE
THAT THAT'S A THURSDAY AGENDA
FROM HER FOR SOME HOLIDAY
ADJUSTMENT FOR EVERYBODY.
BUT WE'LL HAVE TWO ITEMS
WHATEVER RETURNING ITEM WHICH
IS ALTERATIONS OR NONCONFORMING
LANGUAGE THAT WAS PREVIOUSLY
DISCUSSED AT THIS TABLE AND
THEN SECOND THE AFOREMENTIONED
DISCUSSION ON SOME
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN POLICIES.
>> GOT IT.
THANK YOU.
WE'LL MOVE ON TO AGENDA NUMBER
EIGHT EIGHT WHICH IS UNFINISHED
BUSINESS.
THERE ARE NONE THAT TAKES US TO
AGENDA NUMBER NINE A I'M GOING
TO INTRODUCE THE ITEM FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY TWENTY SIX TO
TWENTY THIRTY ONE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN SIPI THIS
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY TWENTY SIX
POINT TWENTY THIRTY ONE ZIP IS
PLANNED FOR CITY CAPITAL
INVESTMENTS TO BE UNDERTAKEN
OVER THE NEXT SIX YEARS.
>> THIS PLAN DESCRIBES PROJECTS
THAT NEED ADDRESSES NEEDS FOR
MUNICIPAL AND PARK FACILITIES,
TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS AND
UTILITY INFRASTRUCTURE ALONG
WITH PROPOSED COSTS AND
SCHEDULING.
AND WE HAVE CARL COLEMAN
CAPITAL PROJECTS ASSET MANAGER
WELCOME WONDERFUL.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR CHAIR AND
COMMISSIONERS FOR HAVING ME
THIS EVENING.
I'M KAYLA COLEMAN, CAPITAL
PROJECTS ASSET MANAGER.
THANK YOU FOR THE INTRODUCTION
CHARLIE.
AND SO I'M GOING TO SHARE WITH
YOU THIS EVENING A BRIEF
PRESENTATION FOR THE BENEFIT.
THIS WILL BE INFORMATION FOR
MANY COMMISSIONERS BUT FOR THE
BENEFIT OF THOSE WHO ARE NEW
AND FOR THOSE FOLLOWING ALONG
WITH MEMBERS THE PUBLIC THAT
MAY BE INTERESTED IN LESS
FAMILIAR.
WE'LL DO A BRIEF OVERVIEW
OF WHAT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PLANNING IS ALL ABOUT AND WHAT
WE'RE HERE REVIEWING THIS
EVENING.
>> SO LET ME JUST GET ORIENTED
WITH HOW I ADVANCE, OK?
LOOKS LIKE I CAN SO THAT WHAT
IS CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PLANNING?
SO CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLANNING
IS THE PLAN WE PUT TOGETHER FOR
ALL OF OUR LARGE PHYSICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS.
IT'S A SIX YEAR PERIOD OF TIME
THAT WE PLAN FOR HERE IN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR AND THESE ARE
THE PHYSICAL IMPROVEMENTS THAT
SERVE THE BASIC NEEDS THAT ARE
CRITICAL FOR COMMUNITY TO
FUNCTION.
IT IS REQUIRED BY THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN THAT WE PREPARE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN AND
IT IS THE STATUTORY DIRECTION
OF THE STATE OF MICHIGAN THAT
THE PLANNING COMMISSION BE THE
APPROVING BODY OF THAT PLAN.
WE COMPLETE THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT CYCLE EVERY YEAR IN
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR BUT IT
LOOKS A LITTLE DIFFERENT AND
EVEN YEARS VERSUS ODD YEARS.
SO THIS YEAR IS AN EVEN YEAR
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR WE DID A
FULL UPDATE TO THE WHOLE SIX
YEAR PLAN.
WE LOOK AT ALL SIX YEARS WE DO
SOME RESCORING REPROGRAMING
OF PROJECTS LOOKING VERY
HOLISTICALLY IN THE ODD YEARS
WE DO A MODIFICATION THAT JUST
ADDRESSES THE FIRST TWO YEARS
OF THE PLAN AT LEAST PRIMARILY
JUST THE FIRST TWO YEARS.
WE CAN MAKE SOME CHANGES IN THE
OUTER YEARS AS NEEDED.
BUT THE FOCUS ON THE TWO YEAR
CYCLE IS TO ALIGN WITH THE
CITY'S BUDGET CYCLE AND IT ALSO
MAKES IT A MORE MANAGEABLE
PROCESS FROM A STAFFING
PERSPECTIVE.
SO NEXT YEAR YOU'LL SEE SORT
OF AN ABBREVIATED VERSION
OF THIS.
>> THIS YEAR WE DID THE WHOLE
PLAN UPDATE.
>> WHAT AM I TALKING ABOUT WHEN
I TALK ABOUT PHYSICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS?
SO THESE COULD BE MUNICIPAL
FACILITIES IF YOU THINK ABOUT
THINGS LIKE FIRE STATIONS, PARK
FACILITY AND UTILITIES COULD
INCLUDE INCLUDE UNDERGROUND
UTILITIES, WATER SANITARY AND
STORM WATER SYSTEMS THAT ARE
UNDERNEATH THE ROADS THAT WE
DRIVE ON BIKE ON THE WATER
TREATMENT AND THE WATER
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY ARE
INCLUDED IN OUR UTILITY
PROJECTS.
TRANSPORTATION WOULD INCLUDE
ANY PAVEMENT RESURFACING AS
WELL AS SIDEWALK PROJECTS, BIKE
CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT, STREET
LIGHTING AND OTHER
TRANSPORTATION RELATED ITEMS.
OTHER INFRASTRUCTURE IS A NEW
GROUPING OF CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PLANNING PROJECTS.
WE FOUND THAT WE WERE SORT
OF ENDING UP WITH A CATCH ALL
OF SOME MISCELLANEOUS THINGS,
SOME OF THE GEOTHERMAL WORK
FROM THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY, SOME ART
PROJECTS THAT THE D.A. WAS
TAKING ON.
THEY DIDN'T HAVE A GOOD FIT IN
OUR NEAT THREE BUBBLES THAT
WE'VE EXISTED WITH OVER THE
LAST COUPLE OF DECADES.
SO WE ADDED A NEW ONE THIS
YEAR.
SO OTHER INFRASTRUCTURE IS NEW
BUT ANY PROJECTS THAT TAKE
PLACE IN ANY OF THOSE AREAS
THAT ARE OVER ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS THAT ARE
ADDRESSING PHYSICAL
INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS GET
PROGRAMED INTO OUR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN AND ALSO IN A
STUDY OF MORE THAN FIFTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS THAT IS
INTENDED TO LEAD TO PHYSICAL
PROJECTS.
SO THIS DOES NOT INCLUDE
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE.
IT DOESN'T INCLUDE PRIVATE
DEVELOPMENT.
HOPEFULLY THAT GIVES YOU SOME
BETTER SENSE OF WHAT A CAPITAL
PROJECT IS WHEN WE PLAN FOR
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS IN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR WE FOLLOWED
THIS GENERAL FLOW OF OUR ORDER
OF OPERATIONS.
SO FIRST WE IDENTIFY PROJECTS
AND SCOPE THEM SO DEFINING WHAT
IS THE WORK TO BE DONE?
WHAT ARE THE NEEDS OF OUR
COMMUNITY?
INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS TO
WHAT ARE THE NEEDS OF OUR
MAINTAIN THEM GOOD WORKING
INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS TO
ORDER AND TO BUILD AS NEEDED
MAINTAIN THEM GOOD WORKING
NEW ASSETS TO MEET THE NEEDS
ORDER AND TO BUILD AS NEEDED
OF THE FUTURE.
NEW ASSETS TO MEET THE NEEDS
WE PRIORITIZE ALL OF OUR NEEDS
OF THE FUTURE.
BASED ON STRATEGIC VALUES WHICH
WE PRIORITIZE ALL OF OUR NEEDS
WE'LL LOOK AT IN A COUPLE
BASED ON STRATEGIC VALUES WHICH
OF SLIDES FURTHER IN THE
WE'LL LOOK AT IN A COUPLE
PRESENTATION AND IN PROJECTS
OF SLIDES FURTHER IN THE
ARE PROGRAMS SO THAT SCHEDULE
PRESENTATION AND IN PROJECTS
GETS PUT TOGETHER THAT SHOWS
ARE PROGRAMS SO THAT SCHEDULE
OVER THE NEXT SIX YEARS WHEN
GETS PUT TOGETHER THAT SHOWS
CAN WE EXPECT TO SEE
OVER THE NEXT SIX YEARS WHEN
EXPENDITURES ON EACH OF THESE
CAN WE EXPECT TO SEE
PROJECTS?
EXPENDITURES ON EACH OF THESE
THAT PROGRAMING IS CONSIDERING
PROJECTS?
THE PRIORITIES AND RANKING
THAT PROGRAMING IS CONSIDERING
RESULTS.
THE PRIORITIES AND RANKING
IT'S LOOKING AT BUDGET
RESULTS.
ESTIMATES FUNDING SOURCE WHAT
IT'S LOOKING AT BUDGET
IS THE FUNDING AVAILABILITY AND
ESTIMATES FUNDING SOURCE WHAT
REVENUE FORECASTS?
IS THE FUNDING AVAILABILITY AND
WHAT IS STAFF CAPACITY AND
REVENUE FORECASTS?
CONSIDERING ALSO PROJECT
WHAT IS STAFF CAPACITY AND
COORDINATION WITH ALL OF THAT
CONSIDERING ALSO PROJECT
IN MIND STAFF DEVELOP A CAPITAL
COORDINATION WITH ALL OF THAT
IMPROVEMENT PLAN AS STAFF HAVE
IN MIND STAFF DEVELOP A CAPITAL
DONE AND ARE BRINGING IT
IMPROVEMENT PLAN AS STAFF HAVE
FORWARD FOR YOU TONIGHT AS THE
DONE AND ARE BRINGING IT
PLANNING COMMISSION, THE
FORWARD FOR YOU TONIGHT AS THE
DECISION MAKER IN THE APPROVING
PLANNING COMMISSION, THE
BODY, IT WILL BE UP TO YOU TO
DECISION MAKER IN THE APPROVING
DECIDE WHETHER OR NOT TO
BODY, IT WILL BE UP TO YOU TO
APPROVE THIS PLAN AS YOU
DECIDE WHETHER OR NOT TO
CONSIDER WHETHER IT IS ALIGNED
APPROVE THIS PLAN AS YOU
WITH EXISTING PLANNING
CONSIDER WHETHER IT IS ALIGNED
DOCUMENTS AND COMPREHENSIVE
WITH EXISTING PLANNING
PLANNING WORK THAT THE CITY IS
DOCUMENTS AND COMPREHENSIVE
UNDERTAKING.
PLANNING WORK THAT THE CITY IS
>> WHAT HAPPENS AFTER THE IS
UNDERTAKING.
APPROVED?
>> WHAT HAPPENS AFTER THE IS
IT GOES ON TO THE CAPITAL
APPROVED?
BUDGETING PROCESS SO THE BUDGET
IT GOES ON TO THE CAPITAL
IS UNDER CITY COUNCIL'S DOMAIN.
BUDGETING PROCESS SO THE BUDGET
THEY ARE THE AUTHORITY OVER
IS UNDER CITY COUNCIL'S DOMAIN.
BUDGET APPROVAL AND THAT IS
THEY ARE THE AUTHORITY OVER
WHERE DOLLARS ACTUALLY GET
BUDGET APPROVAL AND THAT IS
ALLOCATED FOR WORK TO HAPPEN.
WHERE DOLLARS ACTUALLY GET
SO TO CLARIFY SIPI CAPITAL
ALLOCATED FOR WORK TO HAPPEN.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN IS TRULY A
SO TO CLARIFY SIPI CAPITAL
PLAN.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN IS TRULY A
IT IS VERY TYPICAL THAT WE SEE
PLAN.
THE PROJECTS IDENTIFIED IN THE
IT IS VERY TYPICAL THAT WE SEE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
THE PROJECTS IDENTIFIED IN THE
THEY FLOW SEAMLESSLY INTO THE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
CAPITAL BUDGET BUT THAT IS A
THEY FLOW SEAMLESSLY INTO THE
NEXT STEP.
CAPITAL BUDGET BUT THAT IS A
DOLLARS DO NOT GET ALLOCATED
NEXT STEP.
THROUGH THE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PLAN.
>> I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO
UNDERSTAND THAT.
>> SO MAKING SURE WE'RE ALL ON
THE SAME PAGE WHEN WE TALK
ABOUT FISCAL YEAR.
SO I'M PRESENTING TONIGHT THE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN FOR
FISCAL YEARS FBI TWENTY SIX
THROUGH THIRTY ONE.
WHAT AM I TALKING ABOUT?
FISCAL YEAR FOR THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR SPAN'S FROM JULY 1ST
THROUGH JUNE 30TH OF ANY GIVEN
YEAR AND SO FISCAL OR TWENTY
SIX WHICH IS THE FIRST YEAR
OF THIS PLANNING CYCLE STARTS
ON JULY 1ST OF TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE.
>> SO THIS SUMMER THAT WILL
KICK OFF THE FIRST YEAR IN THIS
PLANNING CYCLE CYPRUS'S CAPITAL
BUDGET.
>> SO WALLACE THE IP CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN IS A SIX YEAR
PLAN AS I'VE SAID THE BUDGET IS
A TWO YEAR BUDGET SO CITY
COUNCIL THIS SPRING WOULD BE
PRESENTED WITH THE BUDGET FOR
FY TWENTY SIX AND TWENTY SEVEN
BUT BY CITY CHARTER CITY
COUNCIL DOES APPROVE JUST ONE
YEAR AT A TIME SO THEY WOULD
APPROVE AT FY TWENTY SIX BUDGET
AND THEN COME BACK AGAIN NEXT
YEAR FOR THE SECOND ONE.
SO AGAIN THAT'S SORT OF WHY WE
DO THAT MODIFICATION IN THOSE
ODD YEARS AND THAT ALIGNS WITH
HOW THE BUDGET MOVES TO COUNCIL
AS WELL.
SO A SNAPSHOT OF THE MAGNITUDE
OF THIS PROCESS.
SO WE HAVE OVER 30 MEETINGS
THAT TAKE PLACE.
THERE ARE 11 DIFFERENT ASSET
GROUPS FOR THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT PLAN AND EACH
OF THOSE GROUPS HAS ROUGHLY
THREE MEETINGS.
SOME OF THEM GET CONDENSED.
THERE ARE SOME SMALLER ASSET
GROUPS WITH ONLY A FEW
PROJECTS.
THERE'S ONE ASSET GROUP RIGHT
NOW THAT HAS JUST ONE PROJECT
IN IT.
SO WE DON'T NEED THREE MEETINGS
TO TALK ABOUT THAT ONE AND THEN
A COUPLE OF ASSET GROUPS WILL
END UP TAKING MORE THAN THEIR
PLANNED THREE MEETINGS SO ENDS
UP BEING ABOUT THREE MEETINGS
MORE THAN SEVENTY FIVE HOURS
OF TIME SPLIT AMONG THOSE
THIRTY PLUS MEETINGS AND MORE
THAN 50 STAFF THAT ARE
INVOLVED.
THIS IS AN ORGANIZATION WIDE
EFFORT PUTTING TOGETHER THIS
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
SO WE DO HAVE STAFF FROM ACROSS
THE ENTIRE ORGANIZATION THAT
PARTICIPATE AS WELL AS EXTERNAL
PARTNERS.
THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
SENDS REPRESENTATIVES TO
PARTICIPATE MISSISSIPPI.
IT HELPS TO ENSURE ALIGNMENT
AND COORDINATION WHENEVER
POSSIBLE PARTNERSHIP
OPPORTUNITIES AS WELL.
AND WE HAVE WE'VE HAD
PARTICIPANTS FROM THE
WASHINGTON COUNTY WATER
RESOURCES COMMISSIONER
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE.
WE'VE HAD PARTICIPATION IN THE
PAST FROM THE ANN ARBOR AREA
TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY.
>> SO THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
WAYS THE BREADTH OF THE CITY
PLANNING IS CAPTURED.
>> IT'S TYPICALLY THE INTENSE
THE TYPE PLANNING TIME PERIOD
IS IN THE FALL FOR THE CITY.
WE DO WE KIND OF KICK OFF
SEPTEMBER RIGHT AFTER LABOR DAY
SEPTEMBER, OCTOBER , NOVEMBER
IS OUR HEAVY PLANNING PERIOD
AND ALL OF THIS IS REALLY
WORKING BACKWARDS FROM WHEN
DOES CITY COUNCIL NEED TO
APPROVE THE BUDGET?
WHEN DO WE NEED TO GET STARTED
ON THIS UPDATE IN ORDER TO HAVE
EVERYTHING IN PLACE FOR HAND
OFF TO GET THE BUDGET PREPARED
THIS YEAR THE RESULTED IN FIVE
HUNDRED AND TEN PROJECTS.
IT'S BEEN RIGHT AROUND THERE
FIVE HUNDRED OR SO THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS AND OVER A
BILLION DOLLARS OF FUNDING THAT
IS NEEDED IN THAT SIX YEAR
PLANNING CYCLE WINDOW.
THERE ARE 50 OR MORE POTENTIAL
FUNDING SOURCES THAT WE
EVALUATE AS WE LOOK FOR HOW WE
WILL FUND EACH OF THE PROJECTS.
SO IT'S A PRETTY FAIRLY
INVOLVED AND COMPREHENSIVE
COMPREHENSIVE EFFORT.
SO WE WANT TO MAKE SURE TO
ILLUSTRATE ALL OF THAT THOUGHT
AND EFFORT THAT GOES INTO
PREPARING THIS.
SO I'M GOING TO FOCUS IN WHEN I
SHOW THAT TIMELINE SORT OF THE
KEY MILESTONES ALONG CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENT TIMELINE.
I'M GOING TO FOCUS IN ON A
COUPLE OF THOSE IDENTIFYING
PROJECT NEEDS HOW WHERE THE
PROJECT NEEDS COME FROM.
HOW DID WE GET IDENTIFIED?
THERE ARE MANY DIFFERENT
SOURCES.
IT COULD BE FROM CONDITION
ASSESSMENT.
SO AN EXAMPLE IS WHEN WE RATE
THE PAVEMENT CONDITION AND WE
GET WHAT IS CALLED A PAISER
SCORE THAT IS THE THE FRAMEWORK
OR SYSTEM THAT'S USED FOR
RATING PAYMENT CONDITION AND SO
THAT HELPS IDENTIFY WHERE
PAYMENTS DETERIORATING AND
WHERE INVESTMENT IS NEEDED.
THERE ARE ALSO SITTING CITY
PLANNING DOCUMENTS THAT LEAD TO
NEWLY IDENTIFIED PROJECTS.
>> SO FOR EXAMPLE WHEN THE
MOVING TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION
ZERO COMPREHENSIVE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN WAS
DEVELOPED WHEN A TWO ZERO PLAN
WAS APPROVED EACH AT EACH
OF THOSE POINTS IT LED TO NEW
CAPITAL PROJECTS BEING PUT INTO
THE SIPI.
THERE'S MAINTENANCE HISTORY
THAT WE LOOK AT WHERE ARE WE
SEEING A LOT OF WATER MAIN
BREAK STAFF GOING OUT
CONTINUOUSLY.
STAFF HAVE PARTICULAR KNOWLEDGE
OF AREAS THAT HAVE EXPERIENCED
PROBLEMS.
ALL OF THESE ARE WAYS THAT WE
COULD LEAD TO IDENTIFYING A
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT NEED
COMMUNITY INPUT PRIORITIES, THE
OTHER PRIORITIZATION TOOLS THIS
THEN ONCE ALL OF THOSE NEEDS
HAVE BEEN IDENTIFIED THEY FEED
INTO THE AND WE SCORE EACH ONE
SO WE SCORE AND PRIORITIZE ALL
OF OUR CAPITAL PROJECTS
THINKING ABOUT HOW WELL THE
PROJECT ACHIEVES THE COMMUNITY
GOALS AND STAFF RECOMMENDATIONS
AND HOW ONE PROJECTS EXPECTED
VALUE COMPARES TO ANOTHER.
OF COURSE WE WANT TO INVEST
FIRST IN PROJECTS THAT WILL
BRING THE GREATEST VALUE TO THE
COMMUNITY.
SO THIS IS A SAMPLE OF ONE
OF THE STRATEGIC VALUE
SCORECARDS.
THIS IS SHOWING ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION.
YOU RECEIVED SOME INFORMATION
ABOUT THE SCORING MEASURES
THROUGH A MEMO A COUPLE
OF MONTHS AGO AND AS WAS
DISCUSSED WITH THIS COMMISSION
IN APRIL, STAFF DID GO THROUGH
A VERY THOROUGH PROCESS TO
UPDATE ALL OF THE SCORING
MEASURES ACROSS THE CITY THIS
YEAR.
SO THAT WAS A VERY BIG
UNDERTAKING.
IT WAS AT THE REQUEST OF THIS
COMMISSION TO FOCUS IN ON
EQUITY AND SUSTAINABILITY.
SO WE WORKED CLOSELY WITH STAFF
FROM THE OFFICE
OF ORGANIZATIONAL EQUITY AND
STAFF FROM THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY TO EVALUATE
BETTER WAYS TO INCORPORATE
THOSE CONCEPTS IN THE SCORING
AND PRIORITIZATION.
WE LOOK WITH SUSTAINABILITY IN
PARTICULAR WE LOOKED AT ALL
OF THE ZERO STRATEGIES AND WE
LOOKED TO SEE WHERE THERE WERE
GOOD FITS WITHIN EACH OF THE
ASSET GROUPS.
SO FOR EXAMPLE YOU'LL SEE ON
HERE ENHANCED MOBILITY AND
REDUCE VMT AS ONE OF OUR
STRATEGIC PRIORITIES FOR ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION.
AN SO THIS IS BLENDING BOTH
THE ENHANCED MOBILITY THAT WE
HEAR FROM THE MOVING TOGETHER
TOWARDS VISION ZERO PLAN AS
WELL AS TO REDUCE VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED THAT YOU HEAR FROM THE
H0 PLAN IS ARE VERY SIMILAR AND
OVERLAPPING CONCEPTS AND
THEY'RE IMPORTANT.
IT'S AN IMPORTANT FACTOR TO
DRIVE DECISION MAKING FOR
TRANSPORTATION.
HOWEVER, YOU'LL SEE THAT IT'S
WEIGHT 14 PERCENT WHILE
SIGNIFICANT CERTAINLY THE MOST
IMPACTFUL MEASURE FOR
TRANSPORTATION IS IMPROVING
SAFETY.
THAT IS THE THE BACKBONE OF THE
WHOLE MOVING TOGETHER TOWARDS
VISION ZERO PLAN IS SAFETY AND
THAT IS THE PRIORITY THAT FIRST
AND FOREMOST IS BEING WAITED
FOR ALL OF OUR ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION EFFORTS.
>> SO THAT'S A SAMPLE I WON'T
GO INTO BORE YOU WITH ANY MORE
DETAIL ON THAT, BUT I'M HAPPY
TO ANSWER QUESTIONS.
>> YOU DID RECEIVE ALL THE
SCREENING MEASURES A COUPLE
OF MONTHS AGO.
ALL OF THE PROJECTS THIS YEAR
WERE RESCORED WITH THE
EXCEPTION OF THE PARKS AND
RECREATION ASSET GROUP WHO'S
GOING THROUGH A COMPREHENSIVE
ASSET MANAGEMENT EFFORT RIGHT
NOW.
SO WE SET THEM ASIDE SO AS NOT
TO DUPLICATE THE EFFORTS THAT
THEY ARE GOING THROUGH THEIR
PROJECT SCORECARDS REMAINED AS
IS BUT ALL OTHER ASSET GROUPS
GOT KIND OF AN OVERALL REALLY
THIS IS JUST GOING INTO MORE
DETAIL ON HOW THOSE WEIGHTS ARE
DETERMINED.
I MENTIONED SAFETY BEING
WEIGHTED MORE HEAVILY THAN
MOBILITY AND VMT REDUCTION AND
THAT IS NOT AN ARBITRARILY
DEVELOPED PERCENTAGE NUMBER.
IT COMES OUT OF THIS PAIRWISE
COMPARISON PROCESS WHERE WE
LOOK AT EACH OF THE MEASURES IN
COMPARISON TO EACH OTHER
RELATIVE MAGNITUDE COMPARISON
AND THEN THE SOFTWARE
CALCULATES THOSE PERCENTAGES.
>> SO JUST SOME BACKGROUND ON
WHERE THAT COMES FROM.
THE OTHER STEP OF DEVELOPING
THE SCORING MEASURES IS TO
PROVIDE SOME DEFINITIONS AND AS
FRAMEWORK THAT STAFF WILL USE
WHEN EACH PROJECT IS SCORED.
>> SO YOU'RE SEEING AN EXAMPLE
HERE.
I KNOW IT'S A LOT OF TEXT ON
THE SCREEN BUT YOU REALLY DON'T
NEED TO READ IT IN DETAIL.
IT'S JUST ILLUSTRATING THAT FOR
EACH OF THESE PRIORITIES SUCH
AS IMPROVING SAFETY, ENHANCING
MOBILITY, EXPANDING
CONNECTIVITY THERE ARE
DIFFERENT STEPS ALONG THE
CONTINUUM AND DEFINITIONS THAT
PROVIDE SORT OF A GUIDEPOST FOR
STAFF AS WE SCORE PROJECTS SO
WE CAN LOOK AT WHAT IS THE BEST
FIT FOR ANY PARTICULAR PROJECT
AND FIND THE RIGHT SPOT ON THE
SLIDING SCALE TO DROP DROP THE
SLIDER BAR ON THAT PROJECT AND
ONCE WE DO THAT FOR ALL OF OUR
PROJECTS IT DOES PRODUCE A
RANKED ORDER LISTING OF ALL
OF THE PRODUCTS.
SO QUICK RECAP AND THAT'S THE
IP PROCESS SHOWN IN A SLIGHTLY
DIFFERENT WAY.
WE IDENTIFY ALL THOSE PROJECTS.
THERE BE A VARIETY OF SOURCES
THAT THOSE ARE DEVELOPED FROM.
WE SCORE AND PRIORITIZE THE
PROJECT.
IT GIVES US THAT RANK ORDER
LISTING THEN THERE ARE OTHER
CONSTRAINTS.
THERE'S LIMITED BUDGET WE DON'T
HAVE ENDLESS RESOURCES TO
PROGRAM AN INFINITE NUMBER
OF PROJECTS IN ANY GIVEN FISCAL
YEAR WE HAVE TO LOOK AT HOW
MUCH MONEY IS ACTUALLY
AVAILABLE FROM DIFFERENT
FUNDING SOURCES.
WE HAVE TO CONSIDER STAFF
CAPACITY CONTRACTOR CAPACITY
AND ULTIMATELY THERE BECOMES
SORT OF A CUTOFF LINE WHERE WE
CAN ONLY DO SO MUCH IN A
CERTAIN ASSET GROUP PER YEAR.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER PRESSURES
AS WELL OTHER EXTERNAL
PRESSURES.
SO PROJECT COORDINATION IS ONE.
SO THE EXAMPLE THAT I'LL USE
MOST OFTEN HERE BECAUSE I THINK
IT RESONATES WITH PEOPLE IS
THAT YOU WILL WANT TO
COORDINATE AN UNDERGROUND
UTILITY PROJECT WITH A ROAD
RESURFACING PROJECT TO HAPPEN
IN THE SAME YEAR.
>> IF YOU HAVE IDENTIFIED BOTH
OF THOSE AS A NEED IN THE
SYSTEM SO YOU WOULDN'T WANT TO
GO THROUGH AND RESURFACE THE
PAVEMENT ON A STREET AND THEN
COME BACK IN A COUPLE OF YEARS
AND DIG UP THAT FRESH PAVEMENT
IN ORDER TO REPLACE A WATER
MAIN.
SO THAT'S AN EXAMPLE OF HOW WE
THINK AHEAD TO WHAT OUR NEEDS
ACROSS DIFFERENT UTILITY
GROUPS, DIFFERENT ASSET GROUPS
AND HOW CAN WE BEST COORDINATE
SO THAT WE ARE EFFICIENT IN THE
WAY RESOURCES ARE SPENT
WHENEVER WE'RE LOOKING AT A
SPECIFIC GEOGRAPHIC PROJECT
EXTENT, WE WANT TO GROUP ALL
OF THE WORK THAT IS HAPPENING
IN THAT AREA IN THE SAME TIME
FRAME WHENEVER POSSIBLE TO
ACHIEVE THOSE COST EFFICIENCIES
AND THEN SOMETIMES THERE ARE
OTHER COMPETING POLICY
PRIORITIES AS WELL AND ALL
OF THIS CAN CAUSE PROJECTS TO
SHUFFLE AND
DEVIATE FROM THAT
NICE CLEAN RANKED ORDER LISTING
AND WITH ALL OF THAT IN MIND WE
DEVELOPED THIS VIP SO IT'S NOT
AN EXACT SCIENCE.
THERE ARE THE SHUFFLING THAT
HAPPENS.
THERE'S TRYING TO FIND THE BEST
FIT AND TRYING TO BE AS
RESPONSIBLE AS WE CAN BE WITH
THE RESOURCES AVAILABLE.
>> THOSE ARE SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT ARE DRIVING HOW THAT PLAN
IS DEVELOPED.
AND ONE EXAMPLE THAT I'LL SPEAK
TO YOU BRIEFLY AND WE CAN
DISCUSS MORE IN THE Q&A IF
NEEDED.
THERE IS A QUESTION THAT CAME
IN IN ADVANCE OF TONIGHT'S
PRESENTATION ABOUT THE SUNSET
SIDEWALK GAP AND WHERE THAT
FALLS IN TERMS HOW IT SCORES IN
THE SIDEWALK PRIORITIZATION
SYSTEM AS COMPARED TO WHERE
IT'S PROGRAMED IN THE CITY AND
PART OF THAT LARGE PART OF THAT
IS THE PROJECT COORDINATION
PIECE WHERE THAT'S ALTHOUGH
THERE HAD BEEN A SIDEWALK
PROJECT PROGRAM PREVIOUSLY IT
WAS SCHEDULED I BELIEVE FOR
FIVE TWENTY SEVEN OR TWENTY
EIGHT IN THE LAST SIP'S I COME
THIS FALL AS WE LOOKED AT THE
PAISER RATINGS, THE PAYMENT
CONDITION WE SAW THAT THIS IS
AN AREA THAT IS A NEED FOR
STREET RESURFACING.
>> WE ALSO KNOW THAT THE WATER
MAINS RUNNING ALONG SUNSET
HEADING STRAIGHT TO THE WATER
TREATMENT PLANT ARE ALSO IN
NEED OF ATTENTION AND THERE'S A
RAW WATER ALIGNMENT STUDY THAT
IS HAPPENING CURRENTLY THAT
WILL BETTER INFORM WHAT THE
WATER MAIN NEEDS ARE.
BUT WE ARE ANTICIPATING TO NEED
A WATER MAIN PROJECT IN THAT
AREA.
WE ALREADY KNOW WE NEED A
STREET RESURFACING PROJECT AND
THEN WE KNOW THAT WHILE WE TRY
TO STAFF HAD INITIATED A
SIDEWALK PROJECT A NUMBER
OF YEARS AGO WE WERE ASKED TO
LOOK MORE HOLISTICALLY AT
TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS
BROADLY AND WE DON'T KNOW
WHETHER THAT MIGHT INCLUDE
MOVING COLOURBLIND OR OTHER
IMPACTS THAT ARE MORE RESOURCE
INTENSE AND IMPACTFUL TO THE
PAVEMENT IN THAT AREA.
SO THAT'S AN EXAMPLE TO
HOPEFULLY SOLIDIFY THIS CONCEPT
OF HOW COMPETING PRIORITIES,
HOW PROJECT COORDINATION CAN
COME INTO PLAY AND CAUSE A
DEVIATION FROM THE RANKEST
ORDER.
WESTING WHICH MIGHT SHOW ONE
PROJECT AS HIGHEST VALUE OR
HIGHEST IMPACT IN A
NEIGHBORHOOD.
SO HAPPY TO COME BACK TO THAT
AS WE GET INTO Q&A IF THAT'S
THE PLANNING COMMISSION ROLE.
>> SO WHAT ARE WE HERE FOR
TONIGHT?
YOUR ROLE AS THE DECISION MAKER
FOR THE APPROVAL IS TO CONSIDER
WHETHER OR NOT THE PROJECTS ARE
ALIGNED WITH EXISTING PLANS AND
POLICIES AND DOES THE SKYPE
HELP ACHIEVE COMPREHENSIVE
PLANNING EFFORTS THAT ARE
UNDERWAY?
SO THAT'S KIND OF THE LARGER
TASK AT HAND HERE.
SOME THE HIGHLIGHTS I'VE
TOUCHED ON SOME OF THESE
ALREADY SO TRY NOT TO TO BE TOO
REDUNDANT HERE BUT WE TALKED
ALREADY ABOUT UPDATING, SCORING
AND PRIORITIZATION RANKING THIS
YEAR.
SOME OF OUR OTHER HIGHLIGHTS
THIS YEAR WERE THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT AND MULTI LANE
RECONFIGURATION.
THERE WERE A COUPLE OF COUNCIL
RESOLUTION AND TWENTY TWENTY
THREE THAT SPECIFICALLY
DIRECTED THAT STAFF INCORPORATE
TRAFFIC COMING ELEMENTS INTO
CAPITAL PROJECTS AND ALSO THAT
ROAD RECONFIGURATION BE
EVALUATED FOR CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS.
SO ON ALL OF OUR PROJECTS THAT
ARE IMPACTING PAVEMENT SURFACE
WE HAVE INCORPORATED THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT TRAFFIC CALMING
LANGUAGE TO ENSURE THAT THAT
GETS CONSIDERED AT THE TIME
OF IMPLEMENTATION.
>> THOSE THAT LEVEL OF DETAIL
IS TYPICALLY NOT IDENTIFIED
UNTIL THE DESIGN PHASE OF A
PROJECT BUT THAT IS PLANNED FOR
THEIR THE LANE RECONFIGURATION
THERE IS ALSO A NEW PROJECT IN
THE CIP MULTI LANE ROAD
RECONFIGURE CHINNED FEASIBILITY
STUDY THAT WILL BETTER INFORM
WHAT WE NEED TO DO TO ACHIEVE
THE COUNCIL DIRECTION ON THAT
ITEM LONG TERM PLANNING FOR
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES THOUGHT I
THOUGHT THIS WAS WORTH
HIGHLIGHTING AS THERE ARE A
COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
COMPREHENSIVE PLANS HAPPENING
WITH OUR UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
.
WE HAVE THE SANITARY SYSTEM
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT'S
LOOKING AT THE NEEDS OF OUR
SANITARY SYSTEM AND WHAT OUR
CAPACITY IS TO MEET FUTURE
GROWTH AS WELL AS THE
STORMWATER COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
THAT'S REALLY FOCUSING ON
CLIMATE ADAPTATION AND
RESILIENCY PLANNING AND AND FOR
OUR WATER.
AS I MENTIONED, THERE'S A RAW
WATER MAIN ALIGNMENT STUDY
THAT'S LOOKING AT HOW OUR
SOURCE WATER GETS TO THE PLANT
WHICH IS AS WELL VERY IMPORTANT
FOR CLIMATE ADAPTATION.
>> SO THOSE ARE A COUPLE OF THE
HIGHLIGHTS AT SEA WATER
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM REPLACEMENT
RATES.
THIS WAS AN EFFORT THAT
HAPPENED OVER THE LAST YEAR.
WE WORKED WITH A CONSULTANT TO
LOOK AT HOW IS OUR INVESTMENT
IN OUR UNDERGROUND WATER
UTILITIES SYSTEM ALIGNING WITH
WHAT NEEDS TO HAPPEN TO ENSURE
THAT WE DON'T GET TO A BREAKING
POINT WHERE WE'RE LITERALLY THE
WATER MAINS ARE BREAKING AT A
RATE WE CANNOT KEEP UP WITH.
HOW MUCH DO WE NEED TO BE
INVESTING ON AN ANNUAL BASIS TO
STAY AHEAD OF THAT AND THE
PLANNING AND MODELING THAT WAS
COMPLETED INDICATED A BUDGET
OF TWENTY NINE POINT FOUR TO
FORTY MILLION ANNUALLY SHOULD
BE INVESTED IN WATER MAIN
REPLACEMENT.
WE HAVE AN AGING WATER
INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEM AS WE
LOOKED THIS YEAR AT WHAT IS
CURRENTLY PLANNED IN THE SIPI
IT'S ABOUT TWENTY SEVEN POINT
FIVE MILLION ANNUALLY SO WE ARE
A LITTLE BELOW WHAT THAT TARGET
IS BUT WE'RE NOT TOO FAR OFF
RELATIVELY SPEAKING.
SO I THINK IT WAS JUST IT'S
WORTH MAKING NO THIS WILL BE
SOMETHING I THINK WE FOCUSED ON
STAFF FOCUSED ON OVER THE NEXT
COUPLE OF YEARS TO SEE HOW WE
CAN FUNNEL MORE FUNDING TOWARDS
OUR WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
PLACEMENT.
IT'S UNDERGROUND SO IT'S TENDS
TO BE A LITTLE BIT OUT
OF SIGHT, OUT OF MIND.
OF COURSE IT'S A VERY IMPORTANT
ASSET TO ENSURE THAT WE'RE
MAINTAINING A GOOD CONDITION
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
>> WE HAVE A NEW POLICY THIS
YEAR FOR INFILTRATION.
THERE HAD BEEN A POLICY
PREVIOUSLY THAT GOT UPDATED HAS
TO DO WITH THE INFILTRATION
REQUIREMENTS WHEN THERE ARE
DISTURBANCES TO THE STREET, THE
STREET RECONSTRUCTION OR
SIGNIFICANT UTILITY WORK
HAPPENING.
THIS AGAIN IT ALSO SUPPORTS OUR
CLIMATE ADAPTATION AND
RESILIENCY PLANNING THAT WE ARE
ENSURING ADEQUATE STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT IS PLANNED FOR AND
THEN PAVEMENT ASSET MANAGEMENT.
I WANTED TO NOTE THAT WE HAVE
EXISTING PAYMENT ASSET
MANAGEMENT GOALS THAT WILL
SUNSET IN TWENTY TWENTY SIX.
>> SO OVER THE NEXT OVER THE
NEXT YEAR WE'LL BE REEVALUATING
WHAT THOSE GOALS SHOULD BE AND
THE GOOD NEWS IS WE HAVE
ACHIEVED MANY OF THE TARGETS
THAT WERE SET FOR OUR ASSET
MANAGEMENT GOALS.
WE'VE ALREADY ACHIEVED THEM AND
OTHERS WERE VERY CLOSE TO THAT.
BUT IN THE COMING YEAR WE'LL BE
LOOKING AGAIN AT WHAT THE
TARGETS SHOULD BE TO SIMILAR TO
THE WATER DISTRIBUTION
INVESTMENT THAT I MENTIONED.
WHAT DO WE NEED TO DO TO BRING
OUR PAYMENT CONDITION TO A
SATISFACTORY LEVEL FOR THIS
COMMUNITY?
THESE HIGHLIGHTS I'VE
COVERED SOME OF THEM ALREADY SO
AS I SAID, THEY'RE THE LAST TWO
GREEN BUBBLES HERE.
THE FIVE HUNDRED AND TEN TOTAL
PROJECTS OVER A BILLION DOLLARS
IN TOTAL PROJECT COSTS AND THAT
FIVE HUNDRED AND TEN PROJECTS
IN TOTAL INCLUDES ONE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY EIGHT THAT ARE
COMPLETELY NEW THIS YEAR AND
SIXTY EIGHT WERE IDENTIFIED AS
BEING EITHER COMPLETE THIS
FISCAL YEAR OR WILL BE COMPLETE
BY JUNE 30TH.
THE SIXTY ONE PROJECTS THAT
WERE ELIMINATED OR PLACED ON
HOLD.
THIS COULD BE WORK THAT WAS
IDENTIFIED AS BEING NO LONGER
NEEDED OR THINGS THAT NEED
FURTHER STUDY BEFORE THEY ARE
APPROPRIATE TO ADD BACK INTO
THIS SIPI BUT THAT INFORMATION
IS IN MORE DETAIL IN YOUR
AGENDA PACKETT WHICH PROJECTS
SPECIFICALLY WERE PUT ON HOLD
IN A BRIEF STATEMENT ABOUT WHY
I'M REALIZING I THINK TIME IS
PROBABLY RUNNING OUT.
YOU'VE GOT A LONG NIGHT SO
THESE SLIDES WILL BE AVAILABLE
IN YOUR AGENDA MATERIALS.
THERE'S JUST A COUPLE
OF GRAPHICS HERE.
I'VE SHARED SIMILAR GRAPHICS IN
THE PAST THAT SHOW HOW THE
FUNDING IS BROKEN DOWN.
YOU SEE HERE CITY ON BUILDINGS
IS THE LARGEST OVERALL FUNDING
SOURCE BUT REALLY HOUSING
COMMISSION IS THE BULK OF THAT
AND THEN WATER IS THE NEXT NEXT
HIGHEST EXPENDITURE NUMBER
OF PROJECTS.
WATER IS THE NUMBER ONE.
THEY'RE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
IS SECOND AND STREETS RIGHT
BEHIND THAT AND THEN THIS IS A
BREAKDOWN OF FUNDING ACROSS
DIFFERENT ASSET GROUPS AND KIND
OF SPLIT UP AND HOW IT WHAT IS
NEEDED OVER A SIX YEAR PERIOD
VERSUS THE YEAR ONE OF THE
UPCOMING BUDGET CYCLE IN YEAR
TWO.
BUT I DON'T EXPECT YOU TO BE
ABLE TO ABSORB ALL OF THAT
INFORMATION AS QUICKLY IT WILL
BE AVAILABLE FOR YOUR REFERENCE
AND IT WILL BE POSTED ON THE
CITY'S WEB PAGE AS WELL.
>> IT THERE'S ALSO A REMINDER
JUST THAT THE DASHBOARD THE
DASHBOARD IS AVAILABLE TO
GARGASH MAP IF YOU HAD THIS
HYPERLINK OUR BOOKMARKED YOU
MAY WANT TO REFRESH YOUR
BOOKMARK.
THERE YOU ARE.
HOW DOES CHANGE EACH YEAR
WHENEVER THE MAP GETS UPDATED
SO THE SHORT CODE IS STILL THE
SAME BUT YOU HAVE TO SOMETIMES
CLEAR YOUR CASH IN ORDER TO BE
ABLE TO USE THE SHORT LINK TO
GET TO THE UPDATED WEB PAGE.
>> SO IF YOU HAD ANY TROUBLE
WITH THAT, MAKE SURE TO UPDATE
YOUR BOOKMARK AND NOW OVER TO
QUESTIONS.
YEAH, ACTUALLY WE'RE WE'RE
GOING TO DO IS GO OVER TO
PUBLIC HEARING FIRST AND THEN
WE'RE GOING TO QUESTION
DISCUSSION.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
APPRECIATE THE OVERVIEW.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY THIS IS
PUBLIC HEARING OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON THE SITE.
>> WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PRESENT AND THEN THOSE THAT ARE
REMOTE TO SPEAK REMOTELY.
>> PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE IF ON
THE PHONE OR USE A HAND FEATURE
IN ZOOM FOR PHONE ACCESS,
PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN SEVEN
EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO FOUR
SEVEN AND THE ENTER THE MEETING
NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE
FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX CITY STAFF
WILL IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE
LAST THREE DIGITS THE PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME FOR ZOOME
USERS AND YOU'LL HEAR AN
AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN
IT'S YOUR TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE
ENSURE THAT YOU'RE IN A QUIET
AREA AND PLEASE MUTE BACKGROUND
NOISES FOR ALL PARTICIPANTS
AGAIN PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME
AND ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS WITH THAT IS
THERE ANYONE PRESENT I'D LIKE
TO SPEAK AT THIS TIME
SEEING
NONE?
>> DO WE HAVE REMOTE CALLERS?
>> WE DO GREAT CALLER WITH THE
PHONE NUMBER ENDING WITH ONE
EIGHT FIVE YOU CAN PRESS STAR
SIX ON MUTE AND ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES
CALL OVER THE
PHONE NUMBER ENDING WITH ONE
EIGHT FIVE.
YOU CAN ON MUTE BY STAR SIX AND
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES.
LET'S TRY TO PROCEED TO ADAM
GOODMAN, ADAM GOODMAN YOU HAVE
THREE MINUTES TO ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION
.
>> HOLD ON MADMAN ADAM
, WE
CAN'T HEAR THE CALLERS RIGHT
NOW SO PLEASE HOLD FOR
TECHNICAL DIFFICULTIES
.
>> WHY DON'T WE TAKE A QUICK
THREE MINUTE RECESS SO THAT WE
GET A BREAK SO THAT WE CAN
ADDRESS THIS AND WE'LL COME
BACK TO PUBLIC COMMENT IN JUST
A SECOND.
>> THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THREE MINUTES UNTIL MR.
YEAH.
THERE'S SOMETHING SO
SELF-CENTERED GOING ON AROUND.
FIRST OF ALL, IT'S DOING MRS.
MEYER
AND THE
EXCELLENT OLIVIA
BE THE SAME IDEA WHY YOU WANT
WE'RE TO SO FAR SO GREAT THAT
WE REALLY APPRECIATE ALL THIS
THIS MORNING ABOUT
THE FOURTH
QUARTER OF THIS YEAR AND I
CAN'T HEAR YOU READ THE
HERE
RIGHT BLACKBERRY.
I KNOW OUR WHOLE IS GETTING
READY FOR THE FIRST TIME.
I REALLY DON'T THINK IT'S GOING
TO HAPPEN SO QUICKLY.
JUST NO.
WE'LL TAKE ANOTHER FIVE MINUTES
UNTIL EIGHT OH THREE.
THANK YOU.
EIGHT 03 WELL DID YOU WRITE I
DID NOT READ YOUR AND WHEN
THEY'RE ONLY FORTY FIVE OVER
ABOUT HALF PAST CERTAIN LIMITS
AND JUST NOT HAVING FUN IT'S BY
POSTING TESTING TESTING THAT'S
PROBABLY FEDERAL'S MY
LOW
TESTING THING IS JUST ONE STEP
.
THERE'S NO
HELLO.
SO YOU OH YEAH I'M IN THE
OFFICE BUILDING I NEVER COULD
YOU KNOW IT'S ALL GOOD.
YEAH I'M LIKE THE PROPERTY HERE
WE HAVE PURCHASED THOSE FOUR
YEARS OF FIGHTING BUT IT'S
TAKEN A GREAT PROJECT OUT
OF ANYTHING I HAVE
TO POSSIBLY
DO TO LIMIT TESTING TESTING.
>> GOOD GOOD.
NO CAN I AM I AUDIBLE YES.
>> YOU ARE AUDIBLE OK WHAT WAS
THE SELECTION VOLUME ON OUTPUT
IN THE VOLUME ON THE OUTPUT IN
ZOM.
>> WELL I DON'T KNOW
.
>> ALL RIGHT WE'LL BRING THIS
BACK TO ORDER AND LET'S HOPE
THAT OUR TECHNICAL DIFFICULTIES
HAVE BEEN FIXED.
>> WE APOLOGIZE FOR THE DELAY.
ALL RIGHT.
REMOTE CALLER PARTICIPANT MR.
GOODMAN, IS HE STILL WITH US?
MR. GOODMAN, CAN YOU ADDRESS
THE PLANNING COMMISSION NOW FOR
THREE MINUTES?
>> YEAH, YES.
>> THANK YOU FOR YOUR PATIENCE
,EVERYBODY.
>> YEAH.
SO THIS IS ADAM GOODMAN, 400
VIRGINIA AVENUE.
FIRST OF ALL, THANKS SO MUCH
FOR ALL THE HARD WORK MAKING
SURE THAT MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
YOU HAD THE CHANCE TO ADDRESS
ME TONIGHT.
I'M SPEAKING TO OBJECT TO THE
PROPOSAL TO REMOVE THE BORDER
TO BORDER UNDERPASSES AT THE
INTERSECTION OF FULLER MAIDEN
LANE AND THE EAST MEDICAL
CENTER FROM THE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
THOSE UNDERPASSES ARE BEING
CONTEMPLATED FOR DECADES AND
WOULD CREATE A CONNECTION THAT
IS A LINCHPIN IN A COUNTYWIDE
REGIONAL AND EVENTUALLY A
STATEWIDE NOT MOTORIZED RAIL
NETWORK.
AND I ADD THAT IN MY EXPERIENCE
THE INTERSECTION OF FORMER
INMATE AND LANE WHICH I WHICH
PEOPLE WALKING AND BIKING HAVE
TO TRAVERSE FREQUENTLY TO USE
THE TRAIL CURRENTLY IS A PRETTY
AWFUL PLACE TO WALK OR BIKE.
IT'S BY FAR IT IS THE PLACE IN
THE CITY WHERE I'VE COME
CLOSEST TO GETTING RUN OVER BY
A DRIVER ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS
SO HAVING AN OPTION WHERE FOLKS
COULD BYPASS HAVING TO DEAL
WITH THE CROSSWALKS THERE AND
THE TRAFFIC WOULD BE VERY, VERY
VALUABLE.
THE CITY COUNCIL HAS REPEATEDLY
RECOGNIZED THE IMPORTANCE
OF THESE CONNECTIONS.
FOR EXAMPLE, IN 2015 WITH OUR
FIFTEEN TO FIVE RESOLUTION TO
COMPLETE THE CENTRAL SECTION
OF THE BORDER TO BORDER TRAIL
BETWEEN FULLER AND RIVERSIDE
PARKS AND ALSO MORE RECENTLY A
TWENTY TWENTY ONE IN WHAT IF
THE RESOLUTIONS DEALING WITH
THE E MEDICAL CENTER BRIDGE
WIDENING PROJECT NOW I DO
REALIZE THAT FUNDING FOR ALL
THESE SORTS OF PROJECTS IS
CONSTRAINED AND THE CITY HAS
MANY OTHER PRIORITIES FOR IT.
BUT AS FAR AS I SEE IT THIS IS
ACTUALLY A REASON WE SHOULD
CONTINUE TO INCLUDE THESE
CONNECTIONS IN OUR PLANS RATHER
THAN REMOVING THE BORDER TO
BORDER TRAIL PRESENTS SOME
POTENTIALLY UNIQUE FUNDING
OPPORTUNITIES.
AS YOU MAY BE AWARE, THERE IS A
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION CALLED
HERE ON WATERLOO PATHWAYS THAT
HAS RAISED SIGNIFICANT FUNDING
FOR ITS COMPLETING OTHER
SEGMENTS OF THE BTB TRAIL.
AND YOU KNOW WHAT I'VE HEARD
I'VE HEARD INFORMALLY FROM SOME
OF THEIR BOARD MEMBERS IS THAT
THEY COULD BE INTERESTED IN
WORKING ON THIS CONNECTION BUT
THEY'RE REALLY WAITING FOR THE
CITY TO SIGNAL ANY INTEREST
OF ITS OWN AND WE'RE MOVING
THESE PROJECTS FROM THE CHP
WOULD DO THE EXACT OPPOSITE
OF THAT.
SO I'D ASK THAT YOU YOU KNOW,
BY WHATEVER MEANS YOU CAN
RECONSIDER THIS DECISION.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU, MR. LEONARD.
COLLIER WITH A PHONE NUMBER
ENDING WITH ONE EIGHT FIVE YOU
CAN PRESS STAR SIX TO MEET YOUR
PHONE AND ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION COLOR WITH THE PHONE
NUMBER ENDING WITH ONE EIGHT
FIVE PRESS STAR SIX TO ANSWER
YOUR PHONE IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
.
>> THERE YOU GO.
HELLO.
WE CAN HEAR YOU.
YES, MANY OF ARE CLUES IN I
HAVE A QUESTION ABOUT THE
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT AT 371.
>> SO TEWODROS, I WILL BE
GETTING TO THAT PUBLIC HEARING
A LITTLE BIT LATER ON THE
AGENDA.
SO IF YOU WANT TO STAY TUNED
WHILE ANOTHER OPPORTUNITY TO
ADDRESS THAT POSITION OK, STAY
TUNED.
HIM NOT TOO FAR DOWN THE LINE.
OK, THANKS.
NO OTHER SPEAKERS INDICATED
JULIE OK.
>> ALL RIGHT I'LL GIVE THAT TO
ME FOR OK WITH THAT WE WILL
CLOSE PUBLIC COMMENT.
>> OK, I'M GOING TO READ THE
PROPOSED MOTION WHEREAS SECTION
ONE ONE EIGHT FIVE THE ENTIRE
CITY CODE REQUIRES THAT THE
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
ANNUALLY PREPARE A CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN IDENTIFYING
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS THAT WILL
BE NEEDED WITHIN THE ENSUING
SIX YEARS IN THE GENERAL ORDER
OF PRIORITIES WHEREAS THE
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY TWENTY SIX
THROUGH TWENTY THIRTY ONE HAS
BEEN DRAFTED BY THE CITY ASSET
CATEGORY TEAMS AND REVIEWED BY
THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
AND RESOLVED THAT THE CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION HEREBY
APPROVES THE FISCAL TWENTY
TWENTY SIXTH THROUGH TO THIRTY
ONE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN
AND RESOLVED THAT THE CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDS
THAT THE CITY COUNCIL APPROVE
THE TWENTY SIX THROUGH THIRTY
ONE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN
AS THE BASIS FOR THE FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY TWENTY SIX TWENTY
TWENTY SEVEN CAPITAL BUDGET
MOVED BY COMMISSIONER M.
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER.
>> WE ARE IN DISCUSSION WITH
ANYONE LIKE TO KICK US OFF
COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
>> YEAH FIRST OF ALL I WANT TO
THANK MISS COLEMAN FOR HER
PRESENTATION AND ALSO FOR OUR
COMMENTS CLARIFYING THE
PRIVATIZATION OF THE SUNSET
ROAD RECONFIGURATION PROJECT
FOR THE REST OF THE
COMMISSIONERS.
THAT'S TR EIGHTY TWO FOR EIGHT
AND TRATT TWO FOUR ONE ZERO.
>> I THINK THE THE EXPLANATION
FOR THAT PRIVATIZATION MAKES
SENSE.
WHAT I WANT TO ADDRESS WITH MY
COMMENTS IS THE SEPTEMBER
TWENTY TWENTY ONE DECISION TO
COUPLE THE SIDEWALK CAT PROJECT
WITH THAT HAD FUNDING AND
DESIGNS AND WOULD HAVE BEEN
COMPLETED TWO YEARS TO GO WITH
THE LARGER ROAD RECONFIGURATION
OF SUNSET THAT'S BEING
DISCUSSED NOW IN THE PLAN
THAT'S BEEN DELAYED TO BEYOND
TWENTY AND THIRTY ONE FOR LACK
OF FUNDING.
>> THE DECISION TO COUPLE THOSE
PROJECTS TOGETHER WHICH WAS
MADE ADMINISTRATIVELY BY STAFF
AFTER A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT
OF DESIGN WORK HAD BEEN
CONDUCTED, A SIGNIFICANT AMOUNT
OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT HAD AND
CONDUCTED.
I THINK THAT DECISION HAS BEEN
ENORMOUSLY CONSEQUENTIAL FOR
REASONS TO GET INTO BUT BY WAY
OF BACKGROUND THERE IS A
SIDEWALK AT ALL ON THE NORTH
SIDE OF SUNSET FROM NEWPORT TO
THAT TERMINATES IN WINZ AND
FORSIGHT SCHOOLS THIS IS ONE
OF THE FIRST PROJECTS THAT
STAFF IDENTIFIED FOR FILLING
UNDER THE SIDEWALK MILLAGE IT
IS IT WAS RATED AND IS STILL
RATED AS A HIGH PRIORITY
PROJECT WITHIN THE CITY'S
PRIVATIZATION SCHEME AND IT WAS
ORIGINALLY SCHEDULED TO BE
BUILT IN TWENTY TWENTY TWO
IN
SEPTEMBER TWO THOUSAND TWENTY
ONE STAFF ANNOUNCED THAT THE
SUNSET PORTION OF THE PROJECT
WOULD BE DELAYED IN FAVOR
OF THIS MORE AMBITIOUS, MORE
HOLISTIC RECONSIDER
RECONFIGURATION PROJECT FOR THE
ROAD.
>> THAT DECISION WAS MADE IN
RESPONSE TO RESIDENT FEEDBACK
AT AN AUGUST TWENTY TWENTY ONE
PUBLIC MEETING WHICH I ATTENDED
AS A RESIDENT.
I WOULD CHARACTERIZE THAT
FEEDBACK AT THAT MEETING IS
TYPICAL FOR NEW SIDEWALK
PROJECTS ON EVERY STREET IN THE
CITY THERE WERE CLAIMS THAT THE
CITY SIDEWALK POLICY IS WRONG,
THAT WE DON'T NEED A SIDEWALK
IN EVERY RESIDENTIAL STREET
THERE WERE CLAIMS THAT THE LOSS
OF TREES AND OTHER FOLIAGE WAS
SOMEHOW MORE IMPORTANT THAN THE
SAFETY OF THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
STUDENTS WALKING TO AND FROM
SCHOOL ON THAT STREET, THINGS
LIKE THAT.
I BRING THAT UP TO POINT OUT
THAT THERE WAS NOTHING ABOUT
THAT FEEDBACK AT THAT MEETING
THAT WOULD JUSTIFY THE CARVING
OUT OF THIS STREET FROM FROM
CITYWIDE TRANSPORTATION SAFETY
POLICY AND NOTHING THAT WOULD
IN MY VIEW JUSTIFY DELAYING A
SIDEWALK OUT PROJECT THAT WAS
SUPPOSED TO BE FILLED TWO YEARS
AGO ALL THE WAY OUT TO TWENTY
THIRTY ONE IS CURRENTLY
CONTEMPLATED WHEN THIS DECISION
WAS MADE I FEARED THAT WE WERE
DELAYING THIS SHOVEL READY,
FULLY FUNDED PROJECT IN FAVOR
OF AN AMBITIOUS BUT COMPLETELY
UNFUNDED AND UNPLANNED PROJECT
IT WOULD NEVER GET BUILT AND
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT THAT
DECISION I THINK WAS MADE IN
THE BEST POSSIBLE INTENTIONS, I
THINK WE HAVE TO ACKNOWLEDGE
TODAY THAT IT FAILED BECAUSE BY
COUPLING THESE TWO PROJECTS
TOGETHER WE HAVE ON EXACTLY
WHAT I FEARED WE WOULD DO.
WE HAVE DELAYED THE FILLING
OF THE SIDEWALK PROJECT
INDEFINITELY.
TWO THOUSAND THIRTY ONE TO ME
IS INDEFINITELY THE PRIOR PLAN
BUDGETED TWO DOLLARS MILLION
FOR THIS THIS RECONFIGURATION
PROJECT ON SUNSET IN FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY EIGHT TWENTY NINE
THIS DRAFT DELAYS THE PROJECT
ON SOME UNSPECIFIED DATE BEYOND
TWENTY THIRTY ONE.
ANY STUDENT WINS OR FORSYTH WHO
HAPPENS TO LIVE ON THE NORTH
SIDE OF THE ROAD IS GOING TO
HAVE TO CROSS THAT STREET THAT
IS HEAVILY UTILIZED BY HOSPITAL
COMMUTERS EVERY SINGLE DAY TO
GET TO A SIDEWALK.
THAT SIDEWALK HAS NO BUFFER FOR
SIGNIFICANT STRETCHES, RIGHT?
IT WAS BUILT I GUESS TO IN THAT
MANNER TO AVOID CUTTING DOWN
TREES WHICH IS THE SAME
OBJECTION WE HEARD ON THE OTHER
SIDE OF THE STREET.
SO NOW THAT SIDEWALK ISN'T
APPROPRIATELY SAFE.
>> IT'S THE ONLY SIDEWALK ON
THE STREET IF YOU'RE A
KINDERGARTNER IN TWENTY TWENTY
THREE YOU WILL BE IN SKYLINE
BEFORE THIS THING IS BUILT.
>> THAT IS UNACCEPTABLE.
I THINK THIS IS REALLY
SIGNIFICANT.
THERE IS NO THERE HAS BEEN NO
CHANGE TO THE CITY SCORING
OF THE SIDEWALK THE SUNSET
SECTION OF THE PROJECT WAS AND
IS SCORED AS HIGH PRIORITY FOUR
POINT SEVEN TWO AND FOUR POINT
FOUR EIGHT IN THE CITY'S PART
PRIORITIZED ACTION CALCULATOR
THAT'S HIGHER THAN SEVERAL
OTHER PROJECTS THAT WILL
RECEIVE FUNDING IN THE UPCOMING
FISCAL YEAR UNDER THIS DRAFT.
>> THE SECOND FACT I WANT TO
POINT OUT HERE WE HAVE DESIGN,
WE HAVE SHOVEL READY DESIGNS
OF THE CITY'S ALREADY PAID FOR
SOME LIKE THIRTY OR FORTY
THOUSAND DOLLARS WORTH
OF FUNDING HAS ALREADY GONE
INTO DESIGNING A PROJECT THAT
WE'RE NOT BUILDING.
WE TRIM AND AS OF OCTOBER
TWENTY ONE WE TRY AND BUILD THE
CITY ROUGHLY 90 GRAND FOR THE
JOINT NEWPORT SUNSET PROJECT.
SO HALF OF THAT FIGURE WE'VE
MORE OR LESS LEFT ON THE TABLE
WE COULD PICK UP RIGHT NOW JUST
BY SAYING WE'RE GOING TO TAKE
THIS PROJECT THAT WE'VE NOW
BACKBURN IT FOREVER AND MOVE IT
FORWARD FINALLY AND THIS IS A
POINT I THINK WORTH EMPHASIZING
THIS SPECIFIC DELAYED PROJECT
HAS AN A NOT INSIGNIFICANT WAY
UNDERMINED ONE OF THE CORE
POLITICAL DIRECTIVES OF THE
SIDEWALK MILLAGE WHICH WAS TO
REDUCE THE AMOUNT OF POLITICAL
BLOWBACK WE GET WHEN WE BUILD
SIDE OF OUR PROJECTS BY
DELAYING THIS PROJECT.
>> THIS IS BROUGHT UP AT ALMOST
EVERY MEETING THAT I'VE
ATTENDED RELATING TO A NEW
SIDEWALK PROJECT.
>> THE FACT THAT THIS HAPPENED
IT HAS MOBILIZED PEOPLE TO
OPPOSE SIDEWALK PROJECTS THE
SAME WAY THEY DID BEFORE AND I
THINK THAT WE WE DO OURSELVES A
SERVICE HERE AND WE ADVANCE
CITY POLICY OBJECTIVES BY
REVERSING THAT DECISION,
RERACKING THIS PROJECT,
BUILDING IT IS AS WE ORIGINALLY
INTENDED IT A STAFF SAID WE
SHOULD DO.
I AGREE THAT WE SHOULD AND I
THINK THE CITY NEEDS TO BE
REVISED TO MOVE THIS THING
FORWARD.
OK, THANK YOU.
>> JUST AS A FOLLOW UP FROM
THAT FROM A PROCEDURAL
STANDPOINT, MY UNDERSTANDING IS
THAT THIS IS WHAT DOES THE
MODIFICATION LOOK LIKE?
>> I'M JUST GOING TO VOTE NO.
SO YES, MY PLAN IS TO VOTE NO
ON THIS.
THIS LIKE THIS HAS TO BE
ADDRESSED.
>> THAT'S MY INTENTION.
UNDERSTOOD.
THIS IS A QUESTION FOR STAFF
GENERALLY SPEAKING.
>> WHAT IS THE MODIFICATION
LOOK LIKE IF WE ARE SO THAT'S A
GOOD QUESTION.
>> IT DOESN'T HAPPEN A LOT
BECAUSE AS YOU SEE WE GO
THROUGH A PRETTY ROBUST PROCESS
ON PROJECTS SUCH AS INCLUDING
THIS ONE ABOUT WHY IT ENDS UP
WHERE IT IS.
BUT THIS IS YOUR DOCUMENT YOU
HAVE THE AGENCY TO SAY THAT
SCORING PROCESS THAT'S BEEN
PRESENTED IS INADEQUATE FOR
THIS PARTICULAR PROJECT AND WE
I THINK THAT THIS PARTICULAR
PROJECT SHOULD BE ELEVATED THAT
JUST BE KEEP IN MIND THAT'S
GOING TO HAVE CONSEQUENCES
BECAUSE WE'RE PRESENTING A
FULLY THOUGHT OUT PLAN THAT IS
NOT ONLY CONSIDERING THE
SCORING EVALUATION BUT THE
FINANCING AVAILABLE.
SO IT IS FULLY WITHIN THE
PLANNING COMMISSION'S PURVIEW
RIGHT NOW TO SAY WE THINK THAT
THAT SIDEWALK SHOULD BE
DECOUPLED FROM ALL THE OTHER
ASPECTS OF THIS THAT WAS
EXPLAINED.
YOU KNOW, DESPITE ROAD
IMPROVEMENT NEEDS WATER MAIN
NEEDS THE LIKE, YOU THINK
THAT'S A WORTHWHILE PRIORITY
THAT SHOULD HAVE BEEN
INDEPENDENT OF KNOWING THE
ANSWERS TO THOSE THINGS AND
THEREFORE IT SHOULD BE
ELEVATED.
YOU COULD MODIFY THAT AT THE
TABLE THAT'S GOING TO RESULT IN
THE ADOPTED PLAN THAT'S
PUBLISHED PRESENTED TO CITY
COUNCIL INSERTING THAT INTO THE
PRIOR TO THE PRIORITY WHEREVER
YOU THINK THAT THAT IS
APPROPRIATE.
>> ALTERNATIVELY YOU COULD SAY
WE WOULD LIKE TO SEE MORE
EXAMPLES IF WE IF WE IF WE
BRING THAT FORWARD INDEPENDENT
OF THOSE OTHER ASPECTS, WE
COULD ALSO SPEND THE TIME DOING
ANALYSIS ABOUT WHAT THE IMPACT
THAT IS GOING TO HAVE TO OTHER
BUDGETS, OTHER PROJECTS AND
WHAT WOULD THEN POTENTIALLY
FALL OUT IF THAT IS BEING
ELEVATED MORE QUICKLY BECAUSE
THAT PLAN HAS TO BE SOME
SOMEWHAT RESOURCE CONSTRAINED.
>> OK, THERE'S THERE'S TWO
REASONS WHY I DON'T WANT TO
MAKE A MOTION OF THE TABLE.
THE FIRST REASON IS THE
DECOUPLING AND THE SCORING
OF THE PROJECT INDEPENDENTLY
HASN'T BEEN DONE RIGHT.
IT WAS DONE ORIGINALLY AND
THERE IS A SCORE FOR IT BUT
WHAT I DON'T KNOW IS THAT THERE
ARE OTHER PROJECTS IN THE PLAN
THAT HAVE SCORING AND I DON'T
KNOW AND AND DIFFERENT LEVELS
OF FUNDING AND THE FUNDING
LEVELS ARE UNCLEAR TO ME AND
ALSO WHERE IT WOULD FALL WITHIN
THAT RANKING IS ALSO UNCLEAR.
SO I DON'T WANT TO STEP ON
STAFF'S PREROGATIVE HERE TO SAY
WHERE IT FALLS AND I WOULD HAVE
TO IN ORDER TO MAKE A MOTION SO
WHAT I BUT WHAT I DO WANT TO DO
IS I WANT TO DECOUPLE IT.
I WANT TO REVERSE THAT DECISION
AND I WANT IT RERACKED IN THE
ORDER THAT IT SHOULD BE GIVEN
THAT IT WAS RIGHT OUT OF THE
GATE IN THE SECOND TRANCHE
OF PROJECTS THAT WAS SUPPOSED
TO BE COMPLETED AND IT WAS NOT
THANK YOU SCHOENMAN.
>> YEAH, IF I MAKE FIRST CASE
SO I BELIEVE THE SUNSET BREAKS
TO NEWPORT SIDEWALK PROJECT
THAT YOU'RE REFERRING TO THAT
HAVE BEEN PURSUED IN TWENTY
TWENTY ONE THEN AND A TWENTY
TWENTY TWO WAS PLANNED FOR
CONSTRUCTION.
THAT ONE WAS ELIMINATED AND I
JUST WANT TO CLARIFY FOR THE
HISTORY OF WHAT HAD HAPPENED IN
TWENTY TWENTY ONE THAT FALL
THAT PROJECT WAS ELIMINATED
FROM THE SIPI AND IN TWENTY
TWENTY TWO THE TRANSPORTATION
SINCE THAT TRANSPORTATION
CORRIDOR PROJECT WAS ADDED.
SO JUST TO CLARIFY IN
REFERENCING OF LIKE OF COUPLING
THEM THE TRANSPORTATION
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT WAS BORN
OUT OF THE COMMUNITY FEEDBACK
IN A POLITICAL PRESSURE TO NOT
PURSUE THE SIDEWALK STANDALONE
SIDEWALK PROJECT SO WHAT WE
WOULD BE DOING I THINK IS
REVERTING TO A SIDEWALK PROJECT
RATHER THAN MAINTAINING A
TRANSPORTATION.
I GUESS MAYBE THAT'S A QUESTION
AS TO CLARIFY WHETHER WHEN YOU
WHEN YOU REFERENCE IT IS
DECOUPLING THAT SEEMS TO IMPLY
THAT WOULD BE TWO SEPARATE
PROJECTS AND IT WAS ACTUALLY
THAT ONE REPLACED THE OTHER.
MY PROPOSAL IS TO DECOUPLE THEM
SO SEPARATE THEM AND IF IF
THERE'S A STAFF OR COUNSEL
DESIRE TO RETAIN THE SUNSET
RECONFIGURATION PROJECT AS A
STANDALONE PROJECT WITH ITS OWN
SEPARATE FUNDING SOURCE AND ITS
OWN LINE ITEM IN THE COPY FOR
BEYOND TWO THOUSAND THIRTY ONE
OR WHATEVER IT'S SCHEDULED
THAT'S FINE.
BUT THE SUNSET THE SUNSET
NEWPORT TUBRUQ SIDEWALK OUT
PROJECT IS IN MY MIND IT SHOULD
BE A STANDALONE PROJECT AS IT
WAS ORIGINALLY PLANNED BECAUSE
COUPLING IT TO THE
RECONFIGURATION HAS CAUSED IT
TO BE DELAYED IN A MANNER NOT
ORIGINALLY ENVISIONED BY
COUNCIL OR STAFF OR ANYBODY,
RIGHT?
>> YEAH, OK.
I THINK THAT THAT HELPS CLARIFY
SEE IF THERE WAS SOMETHING ELSE
IN TERMS OF OH I THINK TO JUST
BUILD ON WHAT BRETT HAD SHARED
IN REGARD TO HOW THIS VIP IS
PUT TOGETHER LOOKING
HOLISTICALLY AT THE MILLION
DOLLARS THAT ARE AVAILABLE FOR
SIDEWALK PROJECTS.
SO IF WE WERE IF THIS SIDEWALK
PROJECT WERE TO BE BROUGHT
BACK, IT HAD BEEN ELIMINATED IN
TWENTY TWENTY ONE.
>> IF IT WERE RECREATED THEN
THAT WOULD DISPLACE FUNDING FOR
SOME OTHER PROJECTS.
SO I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT I
JUST WANT TO EMPHASIZE THAT WE
ALL UNDERSTAND TRADE OFFS
BECAUSE SOMETIMES THERE'S
REQUESTS FOR ITEMS THAT ARE NOT
FUNDED AND THERE THERE WILL NOT
BE ANY NEW DOLLARS THAT BECOME
AVAILABLE AS A RESULT THAT KIND
OF TIES TAGS I EMPHASIZE THIS
IS THE PLAN.
THIS DOES NOT ALLOCATE DOLLARS
NAMING IT AS THE PROJECT
DOESN'T AS YOU KNOW, CREATE NEW
MONEY.
>> I UNDERSTAND MY AND PART
OF THE REASON I DON'T WANT TO
MAKE A MOTION TO MODIFY THE
PLAN AGAIN IS BECAUSE IT'S
ENTIRELY POSSIBLE YOU MAY COME
BACK AND SAY WE LOOKED AT IT AS
A STANDALONE PROJECT AND FOR
THESE THREE REASONS IT IS NOT
HIGHER PRIORITY THAN ANYTHING
IN THE QUEUE FOR TWO THOUSAND
TWENTY SIX THROUGH TWENTY
TWENTY NINE.
SO THEREFORE IT'S HERE AND THAT
WOULD BE FINE.
THE REASON I'M SKEPTICAL THAT
THAT'S TRUE IS THAT I BELIEVE
THAT STAFF HAD GOOD REASONS FOR
PUTTING IT AT THE FRONT OF THE
LINE AND I DON'T BELIEVE
ANYTHING HAS CHANGED.
>> SO I TEND TO THINK THAT THE
DECISION THAT WAS MADE
ADMINISTRATIVELY IN SEPTEMBER
OF TWENTY ONE I THINK
IMPLICITLY ASSUMED THAT WE
WOULD FIND A WAY TO GET FUNDING
TO DO A BROADER RECONFIGURATION
AT SOME REASONABLE TIMELINE.
>> THAT ASSUMPTION HAS
COLLAPSED I THINK AND IS NO
LONGER THE CASE.
THE FACT THAT THE CURRENT DRAFT
IN FRONT OF US TONIGHT HAS THIS
PROJECT OUT BEYOND TWENTY
THIRTY ONE TELLS ME THAT IT'S
NOT GOING TO BE BUILT ON ANY
REASONABLE TIMELINE THAT'S TOO
LONG.
SO FOR A PROJECT THAT WE WANTED
TO BUILD IN TWENTY TWENTY TO
TWENTY TWENTY THREE THAT'S TOO
FAR AWAY.
>> IT'S LIKE IT'S GOING TO END
UP BEING TEN YEARS.
>> MISS COLEMAN IF YOU COULD
GIVE US AN UNDERSTANDING
OF WHAT THE TWENTY THIRTY ONE
BUCKET SYMBOLIZES IS IT JUST UP
IT IT YEAH IT TRULY IS BEYOND
THIRTY TWENTY THIRTY ONE IT IS
NOT MEANT TO BE TWENTY THIRTY
TWO.
WE DON'T KNOW THAT THESE ARE
PROJECTS THAT AND THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT I THINK IS
IMPORTANT FOR EVERYONE TO
UNDERSTAND BECAUSE I THINK
THERE'S BEEN COMMUNITY
EXPECTATIONS OR UNDERSTANDING
IN THE PAST THAT IF THEY SEE IT
IN THAT BEYOND YEAR THAT THAT
MEANS COMING RIGHT UP NEXT.
THAT DOESN'T NECESSARILY MEAN
THAT'S TRUE AND I CAN'T SAY FOR
SUNSET MAYBE IT IS TWENTY
THIRTY TWO OR MAYBE IT'S NOT
BUT IN GENERAL THAT THOSE ARE
PROJECTS THAT WE HAVE NOT
LOOKED AT FUNDING AVAILABILITY
FOR YET OUTSIDE OF OUR SIX YEAR
WINDOW.
SO WE JUST DON'T KNOW IT COULD
BE TWENTY THIRTY TWO IT COULD
BE TWENTY FORTY TWO I GOSH WE
DON'T KNOW I WOULDN'T WANT TO
PERSUADE YOU EITHER WAY YOU
KNOW.
>> SURE SURE.
BUT I DO THINK IT'S SOMETHING
TO KEEP IN MIND AS WE TALK
ABOUT WHETHER OR NOT THAT
SIDEWALK PROJECT SHOULD BE
BROUGHT BACK AS IT WAS
ATTEMPTED IT WAS NOT SUPPORTED.
I DON'T KNOW.
I THINK IT'S WORTH REFLECTING
ON WHETHER OR NOT THE OUTCOME
WOULD BE ANY DIFFERENT BECAUSE
I COMPLETELY UNDERSTAND WHAT
COMMISSIONER ADAMS IS SAYING IN
REGARD TO WHAT THE INTENT, THE
MILEAGES AND HOW THAT RANKED IN
THE SYSTEM.
BUT ULTIMATELY FOR ALL OF THOSE
REASONS THE COMMUNITY PUSHED
BACK.
>> I TOLD HIM I COULD NOT
DISAGREE WITH THAT MORE SO
THIRTY PEOPLE SHOWED UP AT A
MEETING AND SQUAWKED ABOUT TREE
LOSS THAT CAN'T BASIS TO
DECLINE TO BUILD SIDEWALKS IN
THE CITY.
IT CAN'T BE OR ELSE WE
SHOULDN'T HAVE THE MILLAGE IN
PLACE.
WE SHOULD JUST TAX WE SHOULD
JUST ASSESS HOMEOWNERS AGAIN
THAT REALLY CANNOT WORK AND THE
FACT THAT IT DID IT SHOULDN'T
SURPRISE US THAT AT THE BROOK
SIDEWALK PUBLIC MEETING IT GOT
BROUGHT UP AND I KNOW THAT THE
NEIGHBORS WHO LIVE ON BROOKS
TALK TO THE NEIGHBORS WHO LIVE
ON SUNSET AND THEY SWAP NOTES.
>> SO WE HAVE AMPLIFIED A
POLITICAL PUSHBACK ON THESE
PROJECTS AND MADE IT HARDER TO
BUILD THEM.
>> I MEAN THIS WAS A SERIOUSLY
CONSEQUENTIAL DECISION THAT WE
MADE AND WE NEED TO RECONSIDER
.
GOT IT.
SO THE DO WE HAVE OTHER
COMMISSIONERS COUNCIL MEMBERS
LIKE COUNCIL MEMBER DESH.
SO I JUST I WANT TO MAKE TWO SO
I WANT TO CLARIFY YOU'RE ASKING
FOR EITHER AN ACTUAL OR A
HYPOTHETICAL IF YOU RANKED THIS
IF YOU TOOK THIS PROJECT AS IF
IT WERE SIMPLY THE SIDEWALK
PROJECT IT WAS AND COMPARED IT
TO THE OTHER THINGS THAT ARE IN
THE QUEUE NOW WHERE WOULD IT
RANK?
>> YEAH, AND THEN YOU WOULD
WANT TO GO SOMEWHERE FROM THERE
BUT THAT'S THE FIRST THING THAT
YOU'RE ASKING.
>> YEAH.
AND IN TERMS OF THE QUESTION IT
WAS NOT SUPPORTED AT THE TIME.
IT WAS NOT SUPPORTED PUBLICLY
BUT I WAS AT A MEETING THREE
WEEKS AGO OR NOT THREE THREE
MONTHS IT SEEMS LIKE ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY YEARS AGO
ALONG BERTEN RIGHT.
>> AND THAT SIDEWALK IS NOT
SUPPORTED EITHER BUT IT'S GOING
TO GO THROUGH AND I WANT IT TO
GO THROUGH AND THESE ARE MY
CONSTITUENTS WHO DON'T WANT AND
WILL BE ANGRY WITH ME BECAUSE
I'M I'M SORRY BUT THIS IS GOING
TO HAPPEN AND THERE WERE
CERTAINLY TWENTY FIVE PEOPLE
THERE AND THEY HAVE BEEN
ADVOCATING FOR FOUR YEARS TO
NOT HAVE THAT SIDEWALK HAPPEN.
IT'S THE ONE THAT'S OPPOSITE
THE WOODEN PATH ALONG YOU KNOW
WHERE IT IS SO I DON'T THINK
THAT I I WORRY THAT WHEN WE IN
SOME INSTANCES ALLOW PUBLIC
OPPOSITION TO STOP A SIDEWALK
AND IN OTHER PLACES WE DON'T.
AND THESE ARE THE SAME
ARGUMENTS.
THESE ARE THE SAME ARGUMENTS
THAT WE HEARD A FEW WEEKS AGO
ON COUNCIL ABOUT THE TREES AND
THERE'S A SIDEWALK ON THE OTHER
SIDE SO WHY DO WE NEED IT HERE
SO YOU KNOW, THEY THEY IT IS A
SUITE OF ARGUMENTS AND IF WE
ARE GOING TO BE NOT SWAYED BY
THEM IN SOME PLACES WE SHOULD
BE NOT SWAYED BY THEM IN OTHER
PLACES AND THIS ONE OUTSIDE A
SUNSET IS REALLY CRUCIAL.
I MEAN THERE ARE BLIND CURVES.
IT'S IT'S NASTY TO HAVE TO BE A
PEDESTRIAN.
>> GOT TO THANK YOU COUNCIL
MEMBER DESH DO WE HAVE OTHER
MATTERS?
>> COMMISSIONER WEITZEN THE MR.
LEONARD I JUST WANT TO STAY
HERE BECAUSE YOU'RE NOT MAKING
A MOTION TO AMEND THE COPY THAT
OUR ONLY OPTION WOULD BE TO
JUST ACCEPT IT AS IT IS OR VOTE
AGAINST IT.
>> YOU CAN SUPPORT REJECT IT OR
POSTPONE ACTION UNTIL YOU GET
SOME OTHER ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION THAT YOU FIND OUT
THAT IF I COULD ADDRESS MISS
COLEMAN, WHAT DOES THAT DO FOR
YOU IF A MAJORITY OF US VOTE
AGAINST THE DOCUMENT FOR THIS
OR FOR THE REASON THAT THE
UNDERPASS THE BIKE PASS HAS
BEEN REMOVED FROM THE OR
DEFERRED INDEFINITE?
UH, I KNOW IT HASN'T HAPPENED
UNPRECEDENTED TERRITORY HERE AT
LEAST IN MY TIME DOING MY BRIEF
TIME DOING THIS.
BUT EVEN MY PREDECESSOR I THINK
HAD NOT EXPERIENCED THIS SO I
THINK THAT PART OF THE THE
TIMELINE AGAIN WITH GETTING THE
SKYPE APPROVAL IS IN ORDER TO
HAND IT OFF FOR CAPITAL
BUDGETING AND TO STAY ON TRACK
.
YES, IT SEEMS LIKE MARCH OR MAY
OR APRIL OR MAY OR WHENEVER
COUNCIL WILL CONSIDER THE
BUDGET SEEMS SO FAR AWAY BUT
THERE'S A LOT OF WORK THAT
NEEDS TO HAPPEN BETWEEN NOW AND
THEN TO GET THE BUDGET PREPARED
.
SO I THINK THE TIME DELAYS
BECOME A CONCERN IN THAT
RESPECT.
THERE IS SOME SOME URGENCY TO
THIS.
HOWEVER, I CANNOT SAY THAT IT
HAS TO BE APPROVED TONIGHT OR
ELSE WE WON'T HAVE A BUDGET IN
APRIL.
I WOULD IMAGINE THERE IS
OPPORTUNITY TO DO REVISIONS IF
NEEDED.
IT IS UP TO THIS BOARD TO THIS
COMMISSION TO DECIDE WHETHER OR
NOT YOU APPROVE AND IF MORE
TIME IS NEEDED THEN I THINK
THAT IS WHAT WE WILL WORK WITH
AND I DO THINK SO THE SUNSET
PROJECTS REVIVING THAT OLD
PROJECT AND SCORING IT I THINK
SEEMS REASONABLE.
I DON'T THINK THAT THAT'S AN
INSURMOUNTABLE TASK.
WE CAN TALK A LITTLE MORE ABOUT
THE THE OTHER PROJECTS THAT
WERE MENTIONED.
HE STARTED WITH THE SIDEWALK I
WAS GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE
UNDERPASS THAT JUST YET BUT
YEAH, LET ME KNOW IF I COULD
JUST STAY HERE FOR A MINUTE
BECAUSE I THINK THERE ARE REAL
CONSEQUENCES.
RIGHT.
BECAUSE I DIDN'T HEAR ENOUGH
AND I'VE HEARD FROM YOU ENOUGH
THAT YOU HAVE SOME FIVE HUNDRED
MEETINGS A YEAR TO DO THIS AND
I WANT TO BOTH ACKNOWLEDGE MY
COLLEAGUE'S CONCERN BUT ALSO
RECOGNIZE THAT YOU HAVE A
SIGNIFICANT WORK EFFORT.
SO IF WE VOTE IT DOWN TODAY AND
THAT CREATES A CASCADE, I THINK
IT'S HELPFUL FOR US JUST TO
UNDERSTAND WHAT THAT LOOKS LIKE
OR IF YOU CAN INFORM US WHAT
WOULD BE A HELPFUL
COMMUNICATION TO YOU.
SO I THINK YOU UNDERSTAND WHAT
COMMISSIONER ADAMS IS ASKING
FOR AND YOU SEEM TO BE AMENABLE
TO THAT IF FOR INSTANCE WE WERE
TO TALK ABOUT THE UNDERPASS AS
A SIMILAR THING BECAUSE IT CAME
UP IN THE EXPANSION OF THAT
BRIDGE AND NOW IT'S BEING
REMOVED FROM THE CITY
ALTOGETHER THAT FOR ME IS
ANOTHER ONE OF THOSE PLACES
WHERE I HAVE SAT AT THE TABLE
TO SAY WHAT REALLY IS OUR ROLE?
ARE WE JUST HERE TO RUBBERSTAMP
WHAT YOU HAVE DONE OR DO WE
ACTUALLY HAVE AGENCY TO SAY WE
CARE ABOUT THESE THINGS, WE
CARE ABOUT HOW OUR CITY IS
BEING PLANNED AND THESE THINGS
HAVE DEMONSTRATIVE IMPACT ON
HUMAN LIVES.
THE KIDS ON SUNSET AND MYSELF
AS A BIKER WHO BIKES THROUGH
THAT INTERSECTION LIKE THE
COLOR OF MR. ADAMS I WAS ALMOST
KILLED AT THAT INTERSECTION.
THERE WAS SOMEBODY COMING DOWN
FULLER FLYING.
I I WAS AT THE INTERSECTION.
THEY DIDN'T SEE THAT THE
TRAFFIC HAD STOPPED AND THEY
SMASHED INTO THE CAR THAT HAD
STOPPED AND HAD I ENTERED AT
THE INTERSECTION WHEN THE CAR
STOPPED TO ALLOW ME TO GO, I
WOULD NOT BE HERE AT THE TABLE
SO THESE ARE NOT LIKE
HYPOTHETICALS AND WE'RE
CERTAINLY NOT TRYING TO MAKE
YOUR WORK HARD BUT I WANT TO
STAY ALIVE AND I WANT OTHERS IN
OUR COMMUNITY TO STAY ALIVE AND
SO TO SEE THESE THINGS PULLED
FROM OUR PLANNING ESPECIALLY AS
WE'RE DOING COMPREHENSIVE
PLANNING RIGHT NOW, IT JUST
FEELS LIKE WE'RE AT CROSS
PURPOSES.
AND SO I APPRECIATE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO DO THIS BUT I
ALSO DON'T WANT TO BE
UNNECESSARILY DIFFICULT TO END
THE WORK THAT YOU'VE BEEN ASKED
TO DO BY THE CITY.
SO SO IT'S REALLY HELPFUL FOR
US TO GET A REAL GOOD SENSE
OF IS THIS OUR DOCUMENT OR ARE
WE JUST SUPPOSED PASS THIS TO
THE NEXT BODY?
>> YEAH, IT'S YOUR DOCUMENT.
YOU DON'T HAVE AGENCY TO DECIDE
TO HIRE A DESIGNER AND PUT THE
MONEY INTO BUILDING AN
UNDERPASS OR A SIDEWALK
.
>> BUT YOU DO HAVE AGENCY TO
SAY THAT THE CITY SHOULD DO
THAT AND THEN IT'S UP TO
COUNCIL TO DECIDE IF YOUR
BALANCING OF MULTIPLE CITY
PRIORITIES IS DONE WELL OR IF
THEY WANT TO DEVIATE FROM THAT.
SO I WANT TO BE CLEAR LIKE THIS
IS YOUR DOCUMENT, THIS IS YOUR
VOICE AND WE ARE HERE KELA AND
MANY PEOPLE ACROSS THE CITY ARE
DOING INCREDIBLE WORK TO TRY TO
PRESENT TO YOU A VERY BALANCED,
THOUGHTFUL AND I AND I WANT TO
BE CLEAR SAFETY IS PART OF IT.
I'M NOT NOT DISPUTE THAT THAT
PROJECT DOESN'T HAVE SAFETY BUT
SAFETY IS SOMETHING THAT WE
LOOK AT AND TRYING TO DECIDE ON
A WIDE VARIETY OF INVESTMENTS
SO I DO WANT TO I JUST DO WANT
TO ALERT THAT IT'S NOT JUST THE
APPLICATION OF OF THAT PROJECT
IN YOUR EXPERIENCE THAT IS AN
IMPORTANT FACTOR THAT WE'RE
CONSIDERING ACROSS THE BOARD A
LOT OF METHODS ABOUT
PRIORITIZING PROJECTS AND IS
INTO THE EXTENT OF WHAT THE
MESSAGE IS TO TO THIS LAND
SHOULD IT NOT BE SUPPORTED
TONIGHT OR AMENDMENTS REQUIRE
TO COMMISSIONER ADAM'S
QUESTIONS?
>> I THINK I WAS NOT AT THAT
MEETING BUT I THINK PART
OF THAT IS THE MESSY COMMUNITY
BUILDING PROCESS AND THAT'S
THAT'S HOW WE GOT HERE.
BUT ONE MESSAGE THAT COULD GO
BACK TO ME AND KAYLA IN
PRESENTING AND DRAFTING THE
NEXT APPLE IMPROVEMENT PLAN IS
WE DON'T WANT SIDEWALKS TO BE
PART OF THAT EFFICIENCY
EQUATION LIKE IN THIS CASE
FRANKLY THAT WAS SORT OF A
CONVENIENT WAY FOR SOMEBODY TO
SAY LET'S THINK ABOUT A WHOLE
MORE HOLISTIC TRANSPORTATION.
WHAT YOU'RE SAYING HERE NOW IS
I PERHAPS WE DON'T WANT TO
COUPLE IT WITH A WATER MAIN
IMPROVEMENT IN TRANSPORTATION
IMPROVEMENTS AND SO IS
SIDEWALKS.
IMPROVEMENTS ARE PARAMOUNT TO
US TO A GREATER EXTENT MAYBE
THAN FINANCIAL EFFICIENCY
ENABLED US TO GET THE MOST BANG
FOR OUR BUCK AND AGAIN, I KNOW
THAT THERE ARE OTHER ASPECTS TO
THIS PROJECT THAN THAT WHY I
DON'T WANT TO SAY THAT WHOLE
THING BUT THAT COULD BE A
MESSAGE THAT YOU GIVE TO US SO
THAT THE NEXT TIME WE'RE
WORKING ON SCORING WE ARE
MINDFUL OF THAT THAT WE WILL
NOT CONSIDER THAT AS A PRIMARY
ROLE AS SAFETY AS GOING FOR
SIDEWALKS GOING FORWARD.
>> THANK YOU, MR. LEONARD.
MR. NORTON.
SO I'M TOTALLY IMPRESSED WITH
THE WORK THAT YOU CLEARLY HAVE
DONE TO PULL THIS PLAN
TOGETHER.
I THINK YOU HIT A HOT BUTTON
ISSUE BECAUSE I TOO HAVE ALMOST
BEEN HIT MULTIPLE TIMES.
IT MEAN AT THE HOSPITAL AND I
THINK THERE ARE OTHERS HERE WHO
HAVE ALMOST BEEN HIT AND I BIKE
A FAIR BIT OF THE CITY AND
THAT'S LIKE ONE OF THE MOST
DANGEROUS INTERSECTIONS I HAVE
TO GET THROUGH.
SO I'M A LITTLE BIT PERPLEXED
HOW IF SAFETY IS A MAJOR
CONCERN HOW THAT'S DROPPING OFF
THE TABLE SO COULD YOU JUST
EXPLAIN THAT HOW DID THAT FALL
OFF THE TABLE THAT THE THE
PROJECTS THAT WERE MENTIONED I
BELIEVE IT WAS PART OF A
BROADER FULLER MAIDEN LANE AND
NON MOTORIZED CONNECTION UNDER
E MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE ALONG
SOUTH SIDE.
THOSE ARE THE INTERSECTION I
UNDERSTOOD THERE WAS GOING TO
BE AN UNDERPASS PUT IN SO THAT
YOU DIDN'T HAVE TO TRY AND
CROSS THE LINE.
THESE ARE TWO PROJECTS THAT
HAVE EXISTED IN THE S.O.P.
ONE OF THEM SINCE TWENTY
FOURTEEN AND ONE OF THEM SINCE
TWENTY SIXTEEN SO THEY ARE LONG
STANDING PROJECTS.
WHAT WAS PROPOSED IN THIS VIP
CYCLE WAS PLACING THEM ON HOLD
NOT ELIMINATING THEM IS SLIGHT
DIFFERENCE.
I REALIZE THAT IT MAY STILL
RESULT IN THE SAME REACTION AND
CONCERN BUT PART OF PLACING
MORE PROJECTS ON HOLD IS TRYING
TO CLARIFY WHAT IS ACTUALLY A
SIX IN A SIX YEAR PLAN AND HOW
WE UTILIZE THAT BEYOND COLUMN
SO WE CAN KEEP THESE IN THE
CITY AS THEY HAVE BEEN OVER THE
LAST TEN PLUS YEARS FOR ONE
OF THE PROJECTS AND EIGHT YEARS
FOR THE OTHER ONE.
WE CAN KEEP THEM IN THE BEYOND
COLUMN.
MY CONCERN FROM A VIP
MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE IS IT'S
CONFUSING TO THE PUBLIC WHEN
THEY KEEP SEEING THE CAN KICKED
DOWN THE ROAD.
AND SO WHAT I AM ASKING STAFF
AS WE GO THROUGH THE PLANNING
PROCESS IS WHEN I SEE THESE
PROJECTS THAT KEEP JUST OUT AND
OUT NOW TO HAVE AN HONEST
CONVERSATION, ARE WE GOING TO
DO THIS IN THE NEXT SIX YEARS
OR NOT OR IN THE NEXT EIGHT TO
TEN YEARS EVEN?
DOES IT SEEM LIKELY AND IF THE
ANSWER IS WE DON'T KNOW OR NOT
LIKELY THEN WE'RE MOVING MORE
AND MORE PROJECTS TO ON HOLD SO
THAT WE HAVE A MORE REALISTIC
LOOK AT WHAT WILL BE COMPLETED
IN THE PLANNING WINDOW.
BUT WHY IS IT NOT GOING TO BE
DONE IN THE NEXT SIX YEARS
MAYBE IS THE NEXT QUESTION AND
A LOT THAT THE ANSWER THAT I
GOT FROM STAFF A LOT IS ABOUT
ALIGNMENT WITH THE MOVING
TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION ZERO
TRANSPORTATION PLAN WHILE
SAFETY CERTAINLY ALIGNS THE
AREAS THAT WERE CALLED OUT AS
PRIORITY FOCUS AREAS OR THE THE
CORRIDORS THAT NEEDED
INVESTMENT, THESE PROJECTS WERE
NOT HIGHLIGHTED IN THAT PLAN AS
A FOCUS AREA.
SO IN ORDER TO STAY ALIGNED
THAT'S A PRIMARY ROLE OF THE
STEPS TO ALIGN WITH OUR OTHER
PLANNING DOCUMENTS IN ORDER TO
STAY ALIGNED.
THE SUGGESTION WAS TO PUT THESE
ON HOLD AND PURSUE THE
TRANSPORTATION WORK THAT IS
SPECIFICALLY CALLED IN THAT
PLAN.
I THINK THAT THIS ONE IS VERY
ACHIEVABLE IF YOU WERE TO MAKE
A MOTION TODAY TO APPROVE THIS
IP BUT KEEP THOSE TWO PROJECTS
IN THE BEYOND TWENTY THIRTY ONE
COLUMN INSTEAD OF ON HOLD THAT
IS A VERY SIMPLE CHANGE
ADMINISTRATIVELY TO TAKE CARE
OF AND THEN THEY COULD BE
REHAVAM YOU WAITED IN THE NEXT
CYCLE TO SEE IF THEY SHOULD BE
PROGRAMS.
>> I'M FAIRLY NEW TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION SO PLEASE
BEAR WITH ME WHAT THE OTHER
PLAN THAT THEY'RE NOT ALIGNED
WITH.
>> CAN YOU EXPLAIN THAT TO ME A
LITTLE BIT?
VISION ZERO TRANSPORTATION
ACTION PLAN IS THE CITY'S
COMPREHENSIVE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN WAS COMPLETED.
IT'S NEITHER APPROVED AROUND
TWENTY TWENTY ONE ADOPTED BY
THE PLANNING COMMISSION AND
CITY COUNCIL IN 2021 AND IT
DIDN'T INCLUDE THOSE
INTERSECTIONS OF SAFETY
CONCERNS IDENTIFIED SOME
PRIORITY INTERSECTIONS AND
CORRIDORS THAT DID NOT IDENTIFY
THAT AS A NON MOTORIZED
PRIORITY SAFETY CONCERN WHILE
AND THERE WAS A ROBUST
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT PROCESS
THAT WENT INTO THAT IT WAS
ROBUST TECHNICAL ADVISORY
COMMITTEE COMMUNITY ADVISORY
COMMITTEE AND SO IN LOOKING AT
THAT PLAN SPECIFICALLY THOSE
WERE NOT REFLECTED AS PROJECTS
THAT WERE CALLED OUT FOR
ATTENTION.
DOES IT STILL LOOK LIKE THE
SAFETY COMPONENTS I THINK
CERTAINLY DO ALIGN IF YOU THINK
OF SAFETY BROADLY VISION ZERO
IS ALL ABOUT TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY AND REDUCING SERIOUS
INJURIES AND FATALITIES FROM
TRANSPORTATION IMPACTS.
SO I THINK THAT YOU CAN MAKE A
CASE THAT IT IS ALIGNED AND I
THINK THAT WOULD BE THAT IN MY
SLIDES WHEN I SHOW THE BUBBLES
OF LIKE WHAT IS YOUR ROLE?
ONE OF THE THINGS YOU DO FOCUS
ON ALIGNMENT WITH EXISTING
PLANNING DOCUMENTS IS A KEY
ROLE OF THIS COMMISSION.
AND SO I THINK IF YOU VIEW THAT
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AS
SUPPORTIVE OF THESE PROJECTS,
THAT'S A FAIR INTERPRETATION
AND POINT TO MAKE.
YES.
SO I UNDERSTAND, YOU KNOW,
LOOKING SYSTEMATICALLY AT
EVERYTHING THAT'S GOING ON
SIMULTANEOUSLY THE VALUE
OF DOING THAT, I'M JUST KIND
OF FLABBERGASTED THAT THOSE
WEREN'T IDENTIFIED SAFETY
CONCERNS INTERSECTIONS THEY'RE
SO DANGEROUS PEOPLE COMING OUT
OF THE HOSPITAL ARE NOT LOOKING
FOR PEDESTRIANS.
THEY'RE SO DANGEROUS.
HOW DID THEY NOT APPEAR AS A
SAFETY CONCERN?
SO I DON'T WANT TO DERAIL THIS
ANYMORE.
I CAN'T FIGURE OUT WHAT'S THE
MOST PRODUCTIVE WAY FORWARD AND
I THINK THAT'S THAT'S A FAIR
POINT.
>> I WANT TO PICK UP ON THAT
THREAT BECAUSE SO I'M HEARING
OBVIOUSLY CONCERNS ABOUT THE
SUNSET SIDEWALK AT THE WAY THAT
IT WAS KIND OF LUMPED TOGETHER
WITH A HOLISTIC PLAN AND WE ARE
ALSO HEARING UNDERPASS.
SO THE WAY I SEE IT RIGHT NOW
THERE'S KIND OF LIKE FOUR
ACTIONS WE COULD TAKE RIGHT
THERE.
THERE'S AN APPROVAL AS IS THERE
IS A DENIAL STRAIGHT UP DENIAL
THERE IS A THIRD OPTION IS
POSTPONEMENT OR THE FOURTH ONE
WOULD BE AN APPROVAL WITH
MODIFICATIONS TO IT BECAUSE WE
DO HAVE WHEREAS CLAUSE AND SO
IT WOULD BE POSSIBLE TO SAY
HEY, WE WANT TO INSERT A
MODIFICATION WITH THE WHEREAS
FOR STAFF TO TAKE A LOOK PRIOR
TO CITY COUNCIL TO TAKE A LOOK
AT THE REPRIVATIZATION AND THE
DECOUPLING OF SUNSET AS WELL AS
THAT.
SO THERE IS THAT AND THEN THE
NEXT THING THAT I DO WANT TO
TALK ABOUT IS THAT MCCALMAN DID
COME TO US IN NOVEMBER.
SO LIKE THE WHOLE IDEA IS WE
ACTUALLY INTRODUCED A MEETING
PRIOR TO THIS ONE TO TALK ABOUT
HEY, CAN WE HAVE MORE
PRODUCTIVE CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
MODIFICATIONS THAT WE COULD
MAKE BEFORE YOU'RE HERE FOR
APPROVAL PORTION OF IT.
>> AND SO I WANT TO KIND
OF LOOK AT THAT PROCESS AS WELL
AND JUST HAVE A MEANINGFUL
CONVERSATION JUST REGARDING THE
FACT THAT IT WOULD BE GREAT TO
GET A LOT OF THIS KIND OF BAKHT
OUT SO THIS IS AN EASIER
CONVERSATION SOMETIMES YOU
KNOW, WE DON'T GET THAT KIND
OF FINAL PRODUCT.
>> SO THERE'S THE FOUR THINGS
THE FOUR OPTIONS RIGHT NOW AND
I DO WANT TO HEAR FROM YOU ON
KIND LIKE THAT APPROVAL,
DENIAL, POSTPONEMENT OR
APPROVAL WITH MODIFICATION AND
THEN TO TALK ABOUT HOW WE CAN
MAKE THAT OTHER MEETING THE
KIND OF THE PRECURSOR TO THIS
ONE A LITTLE BIT MORE ENGAGING
AND PRODUCTIVE FROM FROM A
FEEDBACK STANDPOINT MAYBE THAT
IS YOU WE NEED TO DRIVE A
LITTLE BIT MORE ALL THE
INFORMATION WE GOT THIS WEEK
TRY TO GET US AS MUCH OF THAT
IN THE SEPTEMBER OCTOBER AND
THEN THE YEPEZ TO TAKING A LOOK
AT HOW WE CAN MAKE THAT
ENGAGING.
LET'S TALK ABOUT THE ACTION
ITEM WE HAVE IN FRONT OF US IF
I CAN JUST CORRECT THE RECORD
FOR THAT THIS YEAR I DID NOT
COME IN NOVEMBER.
I DECLARE IN APRIL WHEN WE TALK
ABOUT THIS GREEN UPDATE AND
THEN WE PROVIDED A WRITTEN
COMMUNICATION I THINK THAT WENT
IN SEPTEMBER, SEPTEMBER,
OCTOBER THE SIPI PROCESS THIS
YEAR WITH RESCORING ALL FIVE
HUNDRED AND TEN PROJECTS AND
THEN YOU MET WAS MORE TIME
INTENSE EVEN THAN IT TYPICALLY
IS SO IT DIDN'T PROVIDE AN
OPPORTUNITY TO COME BACK
SOONER.
BUT YES, I THINK TALKING
PROCESS AND HOW WE CAN BE MOST
EFFECTIVE FOR FUTURE CYCLES I
WOULD VERY MUCH WELCOME THAT.
>> YES.
AND I THINK THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE DEFINITELY HAVE AND IT
DOESN'T HAVE TO BE DECIDED LIKE
RIGHT HERE AT THIS MEETING BUT
THAT NEEDS TO BE LOOKED AT.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS, I KNOW YOU
WANT TO GET FEEDBACK ON THAT
APPROVAL WITH MODIFICATION
.
I THINK THAT'S SOMETHING THAT
IT DOESN'T SOUND LIKE YOU'RE IN
FAVOR OF IT.
GIVE SOME YEAH.
>> I'D RATHER I'D RATHER GO
WITH A POSTPONEMENT TO GIVE
STAFF AN OPPORTUNITY TO LOOK AT
THE TWO ISSUES THAT WE'VE
IDENTIFIED RATHER THAN AGAIN
RATHER THAN PURPORT TO KNOW
RIGHT NOW WHERE MY ISSUE HOW IT
SHOULD BE RESOLVED BECAUSE
AGAIN I DON'T KNOW HOW THE
PROJECT GETS SCORED RELATIVE TO
THE OTHER PROJECTS GIVEN THE
CONSTRAINTS.
SIMILARLY, I DON'T KNOW WHAT
THE BEST SOLUTION IS TO THE
UNDERPASS.
THE ISSUES WITH THE WITH THE
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT THE OTHER
COMMISSIONERS HAVE RAISED AND
I'D LIKE TO GIVE STAFF A
MEANINGFUL OPPORTUNITY TO LOOK
AT THOSE CREATIVELY AND COME
BACK TO THE TABLE WITH A BRIEF
HOPEFULLY MINOR REVISIONS TO
THE PLAN THAT ADDRESS THAT
FEEDBACK.
>> OK, GOT IT.
UNDERSTOOD AND PRACTICALLY
SPEAKING, WE'RE BACK JANUARY
TWENTY THIRD FOR A FULL MEETING
.
>> BUT COMMISSIONER MILLS, YOU
WANT TO ADD SOME THIS THING ON
THERE?
>> OK, GOTCHA.
OK, SO IT SOUNDS LIKE IT SOUNDS
LIKE THERE ARE SOME CONCERNS AS
TO SAYING HEY, WE MAY BE MOVING
HASTILY.
WE WANT TO GIVE STAFF A LITTLE
MORE TIME TO CONSIDER THE
THINGS WE'VE BROUGHT UP.
>> SO THANK YOU FOR THAT
FEEDBACK.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS JUST
REGARDING CURRENT ACTION ITEMS
PROCESS FORWARD, MR. MILLS.
>> OK, SO THIS IS NOT ABOUT I
I'M COOL WITH THAT.
>> THANK YOU FOR CLARIFYING
WHAT LIKE THE ON HOLD THINGS
AND FIRST OF ALL THE IDEA THAT
WE HAVE A DOCUMENT THAT SHOWS
WHAT'S BEEN ACCOMPLISHED,
WHAT'S BEEN ELIMINATED AND THE
REASON WHY AND WHAT'S BEEN PUT
ON HOLD I APPRECIATE THAT
TRANSPARENCY IMMENSELY AND I I
THINK IF WE THINK ABOUT OVER
TIME MOST OF THE STUFF THAT WE
TALK ABOUT HERE TENDS TO BE THE
PROJECTS THAT EITHER ALWAYS
LINGER IN BEYOND IN THAT FINAL
CATEGORY OR THINGS THAT LIKE
WHERE DID THAT GET LOST?
WE'VE TALKED ABOUT IT A LOT.
AND SO I I THINK THAT IF WE
WERE TO THINK ABOUT CHANGING
PROCESS TO PULL THINGS FORWARD
OR EARLIER BEFORE BEFORE
JANUARY, I THINK THAT IF WE
HAVE A LIST OF THOSE THINGS
THAT ARE BEING CONTEMPLATED FOR
ON HOLD OR ELIMINATED THAT
WOULD PROBABLY I THINK THAT
THAT WOULD HELP US IDENTIFY ALL
THE THINGS THAT YOU ARE
FLAGGING US LIKE HERE'S THE
THINGS THAT'S YET AGAIN GOING
TO BE IN THE BEYOND CATEGORY.
SO THAT'S ONE I HAVE RANTED
ABOUT MY NEW COMMUTE TO NORTH
CAMPUS AND HOW UNSAFE THAT
INTERSECTION IS AND IT IS IN MY
EMAIL TO WRITE A LETTER TO CITY
HALL TO SAY I LIKE THAT
INTERSECTION IS SO DANGEROUS
AND IT IS IN MOVING IN THE
VISION ZERO IT'S ON PAGE
SEVENTY TWO AND SO I'M NOT SURE
IT'S NOT IT DOESN'T
SPECIFICALLY TALK ABOUT A
BRIDGE BUT AT MAJOR
INTERSECTION ENDS THIS IS
TALKING ABOUT PHYSICALLY
SEPARATING BOTH CYCLISTS AND
MOTOR VEHICLES UP UNTIL THE
INTERSECTION.
>> THE VERY FIRST ONE THAT IS
MENTIONED IS FULLER ROAD AND
MAIDEN LANE.
SO I'M CURIOUS LIKE I'M I WAS
LIKE HOW DID WE MISS THIS?
I DON'T THINK WE DID.
IT'S IN THERE.
IT'S NOT IT DOESN'T TALK ABOUT
A BRIDGE MAYBE THAT WAS AND SO
MAYBE THAT'S WHAT IT IS IF
THERE'S NOT SOMETHING ELSE
PLANNED THAT IT THAT'S LIKE A
LOT I THINK THAT THAT IS THE
MOST DANGEROUS INTERSECTION AS
A CYCLIST IN THIS ENTIRE CITY.
THERE'S OTHERS THERE'S OTHER
PLACES I'VE ALMOST BEEN KILLED
BUT IT IS CRAZY AND SO I'M
GOING TO STRONGLY ADVOCATE IN
WHEN WE SEE THIS FOR BRINGING
THOSE BACK IN BECAUSE I DON'T
KNOW WHAT HAPPENS AND THIS IS I
NEVER REMEMBER I REMEMBER THE
ELIMINATED AND I REMEMBER THE
LIKE WE'VE DONE IT, YOU KNOW,
ACHIEVED SO WE CAN TAKE IT OFF
.
WHAT HAPPENS TO THE HOLD ONES
LIKE HOW DO YOU CONSIDER THAT
IN?
AND IT SEEMED TO ME THAT THERE
WERE FIVE WE'VE TALKED ABOUT
THE TWO BUT THERE WERE FIVE
THAT WERE LISTED IN US ON HOLD
BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE FUNDING
IN THE NEXT SIX YEARS AND SO AT
LEAST FOR THOSE AGAIN I DON'T
HAVE A PONY IN THE GAME AND THE
OTHER BUT LIKE I'M CURIOUS
ABOUT WHY THOSE COULDN'T JUST
STAY FOR MORE TIME IN THE
BEYOND NOW I THINK THE TWO
PROJECTS THAT OR THERE WERE ANY
OF THE ONES OF THE MULTIPLE
THINGS THAT WERE ON HOLD AND I
CAN'T REMEMBER HOW MANY
ENUMERATED WERE ON HOLD FIVE
OF THEM THE SPECIFIC COMMENT
WAS UNLIKELY TO GET FUNDING FOR
THE NEXT SIX YEARS.
I JUST I CAN TELL YOU WHICH
ONES THEY ARE BUT THERE'S OTHER
REASONS THAT OTHER THINGS GET
PUT ON HOLD.
YEAH, YEAH BUT BUT FOR THAT
SPECIFIC REASON I'M CURIOUS
ABOUT THAT AND AGAIN MAYBE
WALKING US THROUGH HOW NEW IS
HOLDS OR LIKE WHAT'S THE
PROCESS WHEN THE NEXT NEXT
YEAR'S PROCESS STARTS.
>> MAY I ENTER A COUPLE QUICK
RESPONSES ON THAT AND MORE
PROJECTS YOU GET REEVALUATED
EACH SIPI CYCLE WE SO THAT IS
PROJECT STATUS IN OUR SOFTWARE
SO WE'RE ABLE TO FILTER TO SAY
OK SHOW EVERYTHING THAT'S ON
HOLD AND THEN WE CAN REVIEW
THOSE AND LOOK AT ANY OF THESE
BE TAKEN OFF OF HOLD.
>> HAVE ANY OF THESE THAT HAVE
BEEN ON HOLD LINGERED ON HOLD
LONG ENOUGH THAT WE SHOULD
CONSIDER ELIMINATING THEM?
SO THAT IS PART OF THE PROCESS.
HOW LONG HAS IT BEEN USED?
I'M NOT SURE WHETHER MY
PREDECESSOR HAD BEEN USING AND
I'VE BEEN IN THIS ROLE NOW FOR
ALMOST THREE YEARS SO IT MAY BE
THAT IT WASN'T PREVIOUSLY USED.
I THINK THAT ALLOWING PROJECTS
TO REMAIN IN THE SIPI IF
THEY'RE NOT LIKELY TO HAPPEN IN
THE SIX YEAR WINDOW CERTAINLY
INTO THAT I THINK RIGHT NOW WE
ARE KIND OF BRIDGING BOTH
BECAUSE SOME PROJECTS ARE IN
THERE THAT AREN'T LIKELY TO
HAVE FUNDING IN SIX YEARS AND
THEY'RE JUST IN THE BEYOND
CATEGORY AND IF SOME ARE PUT ON
HOLD AND I WAS WORKING US MORE
TOWARDS PUTTING THEM ON HOLD SO
THAT WE HAVE A REALISTIC SIX
YEAR PLAN AND THEN ONE OF THE
THINGS WE TALKED ABOUT THIS
YEAR AND IT'S NOT PART OF THIS
CYCLE BUT FOR FUTURE CYCLES IS
TO ACTUALLY PROVIDE A LIST WITH
YOUR PACKET AS WELL OF HERE IS
THE COMPLETE LIST OF ON HOLD
PROJECTS BECAUSE RIGHT NOW
YOU'RE SEEING WHICH ONES WERE
PLACED ON HOLD THIS YEAR BUT
YOU'RE NOT SEEING A
COMPREHENSIVE LIST
OF EVERYTHING THAT'S ON HOLD
WHICH I THINK WOULD BE HELPFUL
IMPROVEMENT.
>> BUT IF YOUR FEEDBACK IS I
MEAN A LOT OF THIS IS ABOUT
FROM MY PERSPECTIVE WHAT WILL
BE MOST HELPFUL FOR THE PUBLIC
TO UNDERSTAND PEOPLE THAT ARE
FOLLOWING ALONG WITH THIS?
HOW DO YOU SET EXPECTATIONS
WITH THE COMMUNITY OF WHAT'S
REALLY GOING TO HAPPEN AND IF
THIS COMMISSION FEELS THAT
KEEPING THOSE IN THE BEYOND
CATEGORY IS THE MOST EFFECTIVE
WAY TO HANDLE THOSE PROJECTS?
I'M COMFORTABLE WITH THAT.
I WOULD DEFER TO YOUR
RECOMMENDATION THERE.
I DON'T KNOW IF THERE WAS
ANOTHER ONE BUT I THINK I GOT
TO MOST OF YOUR POINTS.
>> THANK YOU.
GOT IT.
THANK YOU.
>> YES.
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH SO I WANTED
TO RAISE THE QUESTION AT THE
LANGUAGE THAT I THINK YOU WERE
JUST REFERRING TO.
>> SO ON THE NON NOTARIZED
CONNECTION THAT IS MEDICAL
CENTER DRIVE IT'S NOT LIKELY
WITHIN THE UPCOMING SIX YEAR
SKYPE CYCLE DUE TO FUNDING
LIMITATIONS AND OTHER PROJECT
PRIORITY.
SO ARE THOSE TWO THINGS LINKED?
ARE THEY SEPARABLE IF FUNDING
WERE AVAILABLE WITH THAT WITH
YOU KNOW, WITH THAT PUSH THEM
UP THE PRIORITY AND THIS IS AN
IMPORTANT QUESTION TO ASK ABOUT
THAT B2B TRAIL CONNECTION
BECAUSE THERE IS THE PRIVATE
CHARITY THAT RAISES MONEY FOR
THE B2B TRAIL AND AND I THINK
HAS RAISED THE PRIORITY OF THE
OF THE OTHER CONNECTIONS WE'VE
WORKED ON LIKE THE UNDERPASS
THAT WERE THE TRAIN TRACK
UNDERPASS WORKING ON AND
INSTRUCTIONS COULD BE GIVEN TO
CITY STAFF TO REACH OUT TO HERE
ON WATERLOO PARKWAY PATHWAYS
AND TALKED TO THEM ABOUT
WHETHER THEY WANT TO RAISE
FUNDS FOR THIS.
>> THIS WAS A THIS WAS A
SIGNIFICANT TOPIC OF DISCUSSION
DURING THE DISCUSSION.
I WILL PUT THAT REALLY MILDLY
DISCUSSION ABOUT WIDENING THE
EAST MEDICAL CENTER BRIDGE.
THE IDEA THAT THERE WOULD BE AN
ALTERNATIVE UNDERNEATH AND THAT
THE CITY SHOULD MOVE THAT UP OR
REALLY AS YOU KNOW,
ACKNOWLEDGING THAT WE HAD MADE
A SITUATION WORSE BY THIS
DECISION THAT WE MADE ABOUT
WIDENING THE BRIDGE AND WE
SHOULD AMELIORATE A SITUATION
THAT OUR DECISION MADE WORSE.
SO I THINK THIS IS SOMETHING
THAT I WOULD ALSO LIKE SOME YOU
KNOW, AGAIN, I WOULD LIKE YOU
TO RESPOND OR THINK ABOUT THE
QUESTION WHETHER IF HERE ON
WATERLOO RAISE SOME MONEY,
WOULD THAT CHANGE THE CITY'S
THINKING ABOUT THIS?
IS IT A TECHNICAL PROBLEM?
IS THIS WAY MORE COMPLICATED
AND WAY MORE EXPENSIVE THOUGHT
AND ALSO WHAT IS THAT BECAUSE I
DO THINK THAT THERE'S SUPPOSED
TO BE BICYCLE WORK ON THE
ACTUAL STREET ON THE ROADWAYS
NOT NECESSARILY.
I MEAN THERE ARE TWO SEPARATE
WAYS IN WHICH BIKE TRAFFIC
COULD BE AMELIORATED THERE.
AND I I MY UNDERSTANDING IS
THAT THEY WERE SUPPOSED TO BE
SOMETHING ON THE SURFACE ROADS
AS WELL.
SO I THINK WE NEED TO KNOW A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THIS
SITUATION AT THIS CROSSING.
THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT YOU MOVE
IT UP.
IT JUST YOU CLARIFY FOR US
WOULD ENGAGING WITH YOUR ON
RIVER WATER PATHWAYS HELP YOU
KNOW, IN A LONG TERM WAY?
BUT THAT WOULD THAT WOULD
JUSTIFY KEEPING IT IN THE
BEYOND CATEGORY BECAUSE IT
WOULD MEAN THAT WE'RE ASKING
THE CITY TO TAKE ACTION TO TO
SHORTEN THE HORIZON HERE
BECAUSE THIS IS A CRITICAL
CONNECTION IN THE CITY.
THOSE OF US WHO LIVE ON THE
NORTH SIDE HAVE OUR A NUMBER
OF DIFFERENT WAYS WE CAN RISK
OUR LIVES AND TRY TO GET TO OUR
JOBS SO YOU KNOW AND YOU KNOW,
OBVIOUSLY ONE WOULD LOVE THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN TO MAKE
BETTER CONNECTIVITY BUT IT'S
NOT CLEAR THAT THE CONNECTIVITY
THEY PRODUCE IS GOING TO SERVE
THE RESIDENTS OF THE NORTH
SIDE.
SO IT'S GOING TO SERVE THE
CAMPUS BUT
THERE ARE WAYS TO DO
THAT THAT THAT REALLY DON'T
HELP ANYBODY WHO LIVES IN THE
NEIGHBORHOODS ALONG PONTIAC AND
OTHER PLACES WHICH ARE VERY
HIGHLY POPULATED BECAUSE WE'VE
BEEN BUILDING A LOT THERE.
SO ANYTHING THAT YOU CAN THIS
IS REALLY AN INFORMATIONAL
THING I THINK AS IN ONE
RESPECT, COMMISSIONER ADAMS
QUESTION WAS AN INFORMATIONAL
QUESTION AND THE INFORMATION
THAT COMMISSIONER MILLS HAS
PRESENTED ABOUT WHAT'S
ENVISIONED ZERO WHAT IS THE
REFERENCE IN THAT PASSAGE ABOVE
GROUND AND BELOW GROUND?
THE ALL OF THIS STUFF COULD BE
GREAT IF STAFF WOULD GIVE US
MORE INFORMATION.
SO A POST HOME WOULDN'T
WOULDN'T BE THERE'D BE SOME
CLEAR REASONS ANSWERS THAT
INFORMATION THAT WE'RE LOOKING
FOR AND NOT ASKING YOU TO
PRIORITIZE BECAUSE IT'S REALLY
OUT OF OUR EXPERTIZE PURVIEW.
>> WHAT CAN I CLARIFY THAT
THOUGH IF WE'RE GOING TO GO
THROUGH THE EXERCISE FOR
EXAMPLE TO EAT WHAT I'M HEARING
IS ONE WE REINTRODUCE THE
SUNSET SIDEWALK AS AN ISOLATED
PROJECT AND SCORE IT AND
PRIORITIZE IT.
I GUESS THAT'S WHAT I'M TRYING
TO UNDERSTAND.
THE REASON FOR THE POSTPONEMENT
WOULD BE TO GIVE STAFF TIME TO
DECOUPLE, GO BACK TO THE
ORIGINAL SUNSET PROJECT,
UNDERSTAND HOW THAT WOULD OR
WOULDN'T IMPACT OTHER PRIORITY
PROJECTS WITH THOSE SAME
SOURCES.
SO WE WOULD COME BACK AND SAY
OK, BASED ON THIS NO, IT STILL
DOESN'T RISE TO A HIGHER LEVEL
OR NOW IT WOULD WE WOULD
RECOMMEND THIS IN YEAR THREE
AND THAT MEANS THESE OTHER TWO
OR THREE PROJECTS NOW GO INTO
THAT SOME FUTURE CATEGORY
SIMILARLY FOR THIS THIS PROJECT
I GUESS I WANT TO BE CLEAR IF
IF YOU WANT US TO BRING MORE
INFORMATION ON THAT LIKE WHAT
YOU'RE TALKING ABOUT IS I THINK
IT'S GOING TO BE REALLY
CHALLENGING WHEN YOU'RE TALKING
ABOUT IF WE WERE TO ENGAGE WITH
A NONPROFIT FOR FUNDING, MY
QUESTION TO YOU WOULD BE HOW
MUCH MONEY ARE THEY GOING TO
BRING TO IT SO THAT WE KNOW HOW
THAT WOULD IMPACT INTO OUR OUR
FINANCIAL ASSETS FOR
PRIORITIZING IF WE DON'T CARE
ABOUT GOING THROUGH THAT
EXERCISE.
>> MY RECOMMENDATION TO YOU
WOULD BE JUST TAKE IT FROM
HOLD, PUT IT ON A FUTURE LIST
THAT IS AGAIN TO KAYLA'S
PERSPECTIVE WE THINK ON HOLD IS
BEING A LITTLE BIT MORE HONEST
THAT WE DON'T KNOW HOW TO PAY
FOR THIS IN THE NEXT SIX YEARS.
IT'S NOT THAT PUTTING IT IN THE
SIXTH YEAR IS A STATEMENT THAT
WE'D KNOW HOW TO PAY FOR IT.
BUT IT SEEMS A LITTLE SOFTER ON
HOLD I THINK IS A LITTLE BIT
MORE TRANSPARENT THAT YEAH,
THIS IS A PROJECT THAT WE THINK
WOULD BE GREAT BUT WE HAVE NO
IDEA HOW WE'RE GOING TO
RESOURCE IT.
AND SO IF WE DON'T WANT TO GO
THROUGH THAT EXERCISE, I GUESS
I WOULD JUST ASK THE COMMISSION
TO THINK ABOUT WHAT ADDITIONAL
INFORMATION DO YOU WANT OR
WOULD BE HELPFUL FOR YOU TO
MAKE A DECISION ON?
>> GOT IT UP COMMISSIONER
WISCH.
I THINK I'M STILL IN THE THE
NEXUS OF DO WE ACTUALLY OWN THE
DOCUMENT AND WHAT THAT ACTUALLY
MEANS YOU DO OK.
>> YOU CAN IGNORE ALL OF THE
ADVICE THAT WE ARE PRESENTING
AND BUT I ALSO WANT TO PAY
ATTENTION TO THE AMOUNT OF WORK
THAT THE DOCUMENT REQUIRES AND
THE CASCADE AND I THINK THE
HAPPY COMPROMISE IN ONE'S MIND
MAYBE MINE IS AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR MISGOVERNMENT TO GO BACK
AND THEN LOOK AT THINGS AND
THEN COME BACK TO US.
IF YOU'RE SAYING THAT'S REALLY
NOT AS ONEROUS THAT I'M ON THE
SAME PAGE, I JUST WANT TO MAKE
SURE I'M HEARING DIFFERENT
THINGS ABOUT WHAT ARE WE COMING
BACK WITH AND THAT'S THAT'S ALL
I WANT TO BECAUSE OTHERWISE IT
FEELS LIKE THE ONLY THING IF WE
CARE EXCUSE ME THAT THAT WAS TO
CONDITIONAL OF COURSE THEY'RE
GIVEN THE GIVEN THE CONTEXT
OF HOW WE ARE INVITED TO
PARTICIPATE IN THIS PROCESS
WHICH IS AT THE END IT MEANS WE
EITHER ACCEPT OR REJECT AND
CURRENTLY THERE ARE SIGNIFICANT
THINGS THAT THE SHIP D PRIORITY
IS THAT SOME OR MANY MEMBERS
OF THIS BODY CARE ABOUT AND
GIVEN OUR RESPONSIBILITY TO YOU
IT WOULD MEAN THAT WE WOULD
PROBABLY VOTE IT DOWN.
THAT'S ONE OUTCOME OTHERWISE
THIS WHOLE HOUR LONG
CONVERSATION WAS JUST SOMETHING
OTHER THAN WHAT WE HOPE THAT IT
WOULD ACCOMPLISH.
SO GIVEN THAT THAT IT'S EITHER
APPROVE OR REJECT, IS THERE A
THIRD WAY AND THAT WAS PART
OF WHAT I WAS ASKING FOR WHEN
WE STARTED TALKING EARLIER
WHICH WAS WE AND I THINK
COMMISSIONER ADAMS ACTUALLY
SAID BEST WE DON'T I CAN'T
FIGURE OUT LIKE HOW AND WHY THE
THINGS THAT GOT REMOVED GOT
REMOVED THAT HAPPENED THROUGH A
SERIES OF MEETINGS AND I THINK
I APPRECIATE WHAT YOU HAVE
ARTICULATE THAT THE AT THE DYAS
TONIGHT WHICH IS YOU'RE TRYING
TO BE MORE HONEST ABOUT WHAT'S
ACTUALLY IN THE CITY AND YOU'RE
SAYING THIS THING HAS BEEN IN
HERE FOR TEN YEARS.
ARE WE REALLY GOING TO BUILD IT
?
AND STAFF HAVE SAID NO AND THAT
SEEMS TO BE A FAIRLY HONEST
RESPONSE AND NOW IT'S HERE AT
THE TABLE AND WE'RE LIKE BUT WE
WANT YOU TO AND IT SOUNDS LIKE
OUR ONLY OPTION TO COMMUNICATE
BACK TO STAFF THAT WE WANT YOU
TO DO IS TO VOTE AGAINST THE
PLAN WHICH FEELS SO STRONG AND
IN A SENSE FOR THE LACK OF A
BETTER WORD IT JUST FEELS
DISPROPORTIONED IN A WAY.
AND SO IF THERE'S NOT A FROM
WHAT I'M HEARING FROM YOU, MR.
LEONARD, IF THERE'S NOT A
REASONABLE NON DISPROPORTIONAL
WAY TO DO IT THAT I THINK
YOU'RE TELLING US WE OWN THE
DOCUMENT AND IF WE DON'T LIKE
WHAT THE DOCUMENT HAS, WE
REJECT THE DOCUMENT.
>> YEAH, I JUST WANT TO BE
CLEAR THE THERE ARE OTHER
OPTIONS WE YOU CAN POSTPONE
THIS AND I JUST WANT TO I JUST
WANT TO BE CLEAR THAT IF THAT'S
YOUR CHOICE, I WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT I KNOW WHAT YOU WOULD
LIKE TO SEE TO COME BACK AND SO
YOU DEFINITELY HAVE AN OPTION
HERE.
>> YEAH, BUT BUT THE OTHER
PIECE I WANT TO I WANT TO BE
THIS IS KIND OF COMING BACK TO
COMMISSIONER PLEASE COMMENT
ABOUT THEM THE MESSAGE TO STAFF
AND THE DIRECTION I KNOW IT'S
HARD BECAUSE OF HOW YOU FRAMED
IT.
YOU'RE GETTING THIS LIST
OF CONSEQUENCE AT THE END
OF THE PROCESS BUT IT WOULD
ALSO BE REALLY HELPFUL IN APRIL
FOR US TO SAY INSTEAD OF SAYING
WE ARE GOING TO PRIORITIZE
PROJECT BASED ON A VARIETY
OF CRITERIA INCLUDING
EFFICIENCY OF RESOURCES WHERE
THEY ALIGN SAFETY, EQUITY AND
THE LIKE.
HOWEVER, THAT WOULD ALSO BE A
GREAT TIME FOR THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TO SEND A MESSAGE TO
STAFF BUT WE DON'T CARE ABOUT
THAT FOR THIS UNDERPASS.
WE THINK THAT SHOULD NOT BE
SUBJECT TO THAT SAME SCORING
CRITERIA BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT
WE'RE PRESENTING TO YOU.
WE WE CAME TO YOU IN APRIL AND
WE SAID WE ARE GOING TO
PRIORITIZE BASED ON A LOT
OF DIFFERENT THINGS AND BASED
ON AVAILABLE RESOURCES AND SOME
OF THAT SCORING THAT'S THAT'S
HOW SOME OF THESE PROJECTS HAVE
RESULTED IN THE CONSEQUENCES
THAT THEY HAVE.
>> AND SO IT'S TOTALLY OK.
IT IS YOUR DOCUMENT YOU DO NOT
HAVE TO BE GOVERNED OR ABIDE BY
THOSE SCORES THAT WE PRESENTED
BY THE PRIORITIZATION THAT WE
PRESENTED.
IT IS 100 PERCENT YOUR DOCUMENT
BUT WE DO A LOT OF WORK TO GIVE
IT TO YOU IN A WAY THAT'S WELL
REASONED, WELL-FOUNDED AND
LOGICAL IN THAT REGARD.
SO SO I UNDERSTAND THE GRAVITY
BECAUSE YOU'RE GETTING THESE
CONSEQUENCES.
IT'S HARD BECAUSE THERE ARE
PROJECTS THAT WE ALL SEE THAT
WE WOULD LIKE TO SEE.
>> WE WISH YOU SPEAKING FOR
EVERYBODY IN THIS BUILDING.
WE WISH THAT THIS WAS AN AEGEUS
LONGER OF PROJECTS WE CAN
ACCOMPLISH.
>> WE CAN'T WE GOT TO MAKE SOME
TRADEOFFS.
>> YEP.
UNDERSTOOD.
COUNTY COUNCIL MEMBER AND THEN
COMMISSIONER JUST WANTED TO
CLARIFY AS MUCH AS I COULD THE
QUESTIONS THAT YOU POSED.
WHAT I THOUGHT I UNDERSTOOD
WHEN COMMISSIONER ADAMS AND I
EXCHANGED EARLIER WAS THAT THE
QUESTION IS HOW WOULD IF YOU IF
INSTEAD OF REPLACING THE SUNSET
SIDEWALK PROJECT WITH A
HOLISTIC SPECULATIVE HAS NO
FUNDING AND IS NINE YEARS OUT,
IF YOU JUST WENT BACK TO WHAT
WOULD BE HOW WHAT WOULD YOU HOW
WOULD THE SIDEWALK PROJECT
ITSELF RANK TODAY NOT ASKING
FOR IT TO BE RIGHT PRIORITIZED
THIS YEAR.
JUST HOW WOULD IT RANK BECAUSE
THEN WE CAN INSTRUCT FOR NEXT
YEAR WE CAN TRY TO GET THE TO
COME BACK ALIVE ON ITS OWN FEET
AND HAVE IT PRIORITIZED IS TOO
LATE FOR THAT SO THAT JUST THE
QUESTION IS HOW IT RIGHT.
>> THAT'S THAT'S MY QUESTION.
IF WE GO BACK AND CONSIDER THAT
PROJECT JUST AS A SIDEWALK WE
COULD PROBABLY CONSIDER TO SEE
HOW IT RANKED IN THE
PRIORITIZATION THIS YEAR AS
WELL.
>> SO THAT'S MY QUESTION.
WE WE CAN DO THAT SCORING AND
WE CAN DO THAT RIGHT?
NO, BUT WE COULD ALSO TELL YOU
HOW WOULD THAT CHANGE THE ORDER
OF PROJECTS IF YEAH.
>> SO THAT'S WHAT I WANTED TO
BE CLEAR YOU COULD TELL US THAT
BUT NOT NECESSARILY ACTUALLY
PUT IT INTO ACTION AND CHANGE.
>> YOU KNOW WE COULD YOU COULD
YOU REALLY COULD YEAH WE COULD
PUT IT IN YEAR FIVE UNTIL YOU
DO THAT BECAUSE WE'RE ADDING
THIS TO YOUR FIVE AND IT'S A
ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLAR PROJECT THAT MEANS THIS
OTHER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
THOUSAND DOLLAR PROJECT IS NOW
GOING TO GO INTO YOUR SIX WEEK
TO DO THAT.
YEAH.
AND IF THAT OTHER ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLAR
PROJECT IS A LOWER RANK I'M NOT
I'M HAPPY ABOUT YEAH YEAH.
>> THEN IT'S THE DECOUPLING IS
COMING AWAY FROM THAT COMMUNITY
CONVERSATION AND IT'S ALSO
COMING AWAY FROM A VERY STAFF
ORIENTED INTENTION IF WE'RE
GOING TO HAVE A BROADER
CONVERSATION LET'S HAVE A BROAD
CONVERSATION ABOUT WATER MAINS
IN THE LAKE THAT WOULD ALSO BE
SETTING ASIDE THAT COALESCENCE
OF TRYING TO MAYBE ONLY CRACK
THAT STREET ONCE TO SAY NO, WE
THE SIDEWALK WAS PREVIOUSLY
IDENTIFIED.
THERE MIGHT BE PLANNING
COMMISSION
INVESTMENT IN THIS
CASE WE DON'T THINK WE SHOULD
DO THAT.
I THINK WE COULD.
>> NOW DOES THIS THE COUNSEL TO
OR ARE WE THE LAST TO APPROVE
IT AND THEN IT'S FORWARDED TO
THE CITY COUNCIL AS YOUR VOICE
AS OK AND THE CITY COUNCIL GET
TO WRITE RESOLUTIONS AND SAY
PLANNING COMMISSION WAS DUMB OR
REALLY ANY QUESTION DOESN'T
HAVE TO DO ANYTHING IN THIS
REGARD.
>> LET ME DO IT.
THE COMPREHENSIVE
THEN AND THEN
IN TERMS OF THE SECOND THING
ABOUT THE UNDERPASS THING, THIS
FEELS MORE MURKY TO ME BUT I
FEEL AS THOUGH THERE NEEDS TO
BE I FEEL LIKE A CONVERSATION
NEEDS TO HAPPEN WITH MAYBE
SOMEONE ELSE WHO NEGOTIATES
WITH OTHER ENTITIES, YOU KNOW,
AND JUST TALK TO THAT PERSON
ABOUT HOW TO THINK ABOUT THIS
THING, MOVING IT UP, GETTING
SOME FUNDING IN PLACE SO THE
PRIORITY CAN SHIFT RATHER THAN
ASKING YOU HYPOTHETICALLY IF
SOMEBODY DROPPED A BOMB FULL
OF DOLLARS, WOULD YOU CHANGE?
YEAH, YEAH.
NO.
AND I THINK THE SHORT ANSWER IS
ABSOLUTELY THAT COULD CHANGE IT
BUT IT'S REALLY HARD FOR US TO
DO THAT WITHOUT UNDERSTANDING
WHAT THAT HOW FAR WE GO TO
FATHER.
>> AND BEFORE I LOSE THIS
THREAD, YOU WANT MORE THAN A
WEEK TO DO ALL THIS RIGHT TOO.
>> I AM OUT OF THE OFFICE ALL
OF NEXT WEEK SO FEBRUARY 4TH
MIGHT BE THE RETURN RATHER THAN
JANUARY.
>> TWENTY THIRD IS MY
RECOMMENDATION THE OTHER DAY
OF COURSE WE HAVE YET TO
DISCUSS THIS AS AN OPTION AND I
DON'T KNOW THAT IT WILL BE
AMENABLE TO A COMMISSION.
BUT KEEP IN MIND THAT WE DO
UPDATE THIS PLAN EVERY YEAR.
WE DO AN OVERHAUL IN THE EVEN
YEARS AND MORE MINOR
MODIFICATIONS IN THE ODD YEARS
BUT THAT IS NOT A HARD AND FAST
RULE THAT WE CAN'T MAKE CHANGES
IN THE OUTER YEARS NEXT YEAR IN
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
SO I DO THINK ANOTHER OPTION
WOULD BE APPROVAL WITH A LIST
OF CONDITIONS THAT ITEMS B
ADDRESSED IN THE FALL OF TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE CYCLE.
I WOULD DEFER TO MR. LEINERT AS
TO WHETHER THAT'S APPROPRIATE
BUT IT SEEMS THAT YOU COULD
STILL APPROVE THIS.
WHAT'S MOST IMPORTANT IS IF
THERE'S ANYTHING IN ESPECIALLY
FBI TWENTY SIX BUT REALLY AFTER
TWENTY SIX AND TWENTY SEVEN
THAT YOU SEE ISSUE WITH THAT'S
WHAT GETS PUT TOGETHER AS THE
TWO YEAR BUDGET CYCLE IN THE
TWO YEAR BUDGET.
THEY'RE NOT LOOKING AT ANYTHING
BEYOND FOIA.
>> TWENTY SEVEN ANYWAY.
SURE NO THAT IS AN OPTION BUT I
RECOGNIZE IF YOU'RE NOT
COMFORTABLE PUTTING YOUR STAMP
ON A PLAN THAT HAS THESE ITEMS
BRING GREAT CONCERN I CAN FULLY
UNDERSTAND BUT I DO THINK YOU
COULD PROPOSE CONDITIONS OR
WRITE A SUPPLEMENTAL MEMO OR
SOMETHING OF THAT NATURE THAT
ILLUSTRATES WHAT MUST BE
ADDRESSED IN THE NEXT CYCLE.
>> GOT IT.
THANK YOU.
AND THEN COMMISSIONER, WHETHER
IT BE WITH WAS IT LISTENING TO
ALL THIS?
I KIND OF AGREE WITH EVERYONE
WHICH IS YEAH BUT ONE OF THE
PROBLEMS THAT I LOOK AT WHEN
I'M LOOKING AT THIS IS LOOKING
AT THE PROJECT CLEAN UP AND I
SEE WOW HILL STREET FIFTH TO
WASHTENAW SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS
HAVE BEEN TAKEN OUT AND WE KNOW
ONE PERSON WAS KILLED, ANOTHER
PERSON WAS BADLY INJURED ON
THAT ON HILL STREET.
SO DO WE THEN START DOES THIS
START TO ADD YOU KNOW, WE KNOW
THAT'S A HIGHLY TRAFFICKED
AREA.
WE KNOW THAT SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS COULD BE SO I'M
NOT SAYING THAT I DON'T THINK
ANY OF THE OTHERS I'M I'M JUST
KIND OF USING THAT AS AN
EXAMPLE OF EVERYTHING COULD BE
LOOKED AT AS WELL.
MY THING OF MY EXPERIENCE IS ON
HILL STREET WE NEED THESE
SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS AND MAYBE
IN THAT PARTICULAR CASE THIS
WAS FOLDED INTO SOMETHING ELSE.
BUT I JUST KIND OF MIXED WITH A
C WHICH IS THAT EITHER DONE OR
WILL BE DONE BY THE END OF THIS
CURRENT FISCAL YEAR THAT ISN'T
SUGGESTING THAT IT WAS PUT ON
HOLD OR ELIMINATED.
IT'S THE CLEAN UP AS BOTH WORK
THAT'S BEEN DONE AND OTHER SORT
OF JUST AS AN EXAMPLE OF LIKE
EVERY THING COULD BE.
AND IF WE TALK ABOUT POLITICAL
ISSUES WE ARE NOT OTHER THAN
COMMISSIONERS OR COUNCIL MEMBER
DISH, WE ARE NOT ELECTED AND WE
BRING OUR OWN POLITICS AND OUR
OWN SPECIFIC LOOK AT HEY THIS
PIECE YOU KNOW I THE RUNWAY
EXPANSION OF THE AIRPORT OR
WHICH HAS BEEN A HUGE DEAL IN
THE COMMUNITY LIKE AT THIS
TABLE AT THIS POINT PULLING
THESE OUT JUST SEEMS TO ME TO
BE LIKE WOW, WE'RE JUST REALLY
TRYING TO AND I'M NOT SAYING
THAT ANY OF THESE THINGS ARE
ARE NOT WORTH DOING BUT IT'S IT
SEEMS LIKE I WOULD BE MORE
INCLINED TO APPROVE THIS AND
THEN DO SOME OF THE LOOK AT
NEXT YEAR OR HOW CAN WE MAKE
THE STRATEGY, YOU KNOW, MORE
IMPORTANT FOR NEXT YEAR
OF THESE PIECES THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT BECAUSE I JUST FEEL
LIKE WE COULD TAKE A LOT
OF THINGS OUT AND CERTAIN
SIDEWALK APPS AND CERTAIN THAT
COULD THEN JUST AND WE'RE NOT
GOING THROUGH THAT PROCESS.
>> WE'RE GOING THROUGH ALL OF I
WALK ON HILL STREET AND I WANT
THIS TO BE CHANGED OR WE KNOW
SOMETHING BAD HAPPENED ON THIS
STREET AND AND SO I'M JUST
THAT'S MY PERSPECTIVE.
I I AGREE WITH WHAT EVERYBODY
SAID BUT IT JUST FEELS LIKE
THIS IS IT SEEMS LIKE THIS IS
TOO LATE AND YET IT IS OUR
DOCUMENT AND SO I I AGREE THAT
THAT WE SHOULD BE ABLE TO SAY
BUT THERE'S A LOT IN THIS
DOCUMENT AND I KNOW A LOT
OF PEOPLE HAVE TAKEN A LOT
OF TIME TO MAKE THIS AS
FEASIBLE AND AS REALISTIC A
DOCUMENT AS POSSIBLE AND TO
KIND OF PULL OUT CERTAIN THINGS
AND MAKE CERTAIN CHANGES.
MAYBE IT'S WORTH IT FOR THESE
SPECIFIED PIECES BUT IT JUST
SEEMS LIKE US DOING THIS AT
THIS POINT IS NOT NOT THE BEST
USE OF EVERYONE'S TIME.
GOT IT.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT,
QUICK.
>> I PROMISE FIRST OF ALL,
THANK YOU FOR ALL OF THIS WORK.
I DON'T KNOW HOW YOU BALANCE IN
YOUR HEAD.
I HAVE A QUESTION THAT I SHOULD
PROBABLY KNOW THE ANSWER TO THE
SCORING CRITERIA FOR THIS COPY.
WAS IT WAS IT DIFFERENT THAN IT
WAS?
RIGHT.
OK, THAT MAKES SO I THINK
THINGS GOT SHUFFLED AROUND A
LOT BASED ON THIS NEW CRITERIA.
RIGHT.
SO I WAS JUST LOOKING BACK I
THINK I FOUND THE TWENTY TWENTY
FOUR COPY AND FOR EXAMPLE THE
FILLER THING WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT BACK THEN IS PROGRAM FOUR
POINT TWENTY SEVEN SUNSET WAS
TWENTY TWENTY EIGHT TWENTY
TWENTY NINE TO YOUR POINT WE'RE
REALLY JUST LOOKING AT THE NEXT
TWO YEARS IT'S LIKE THAT COULD
SAY TWENTY TWENTY SEVEN BUT
THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT THE
BUDGET IS ACTUALLY GOING TO BE
ALLOCATED FOR I THINK IT'S LIKE
A REALLY IMPORTANT THING TO
UNDERSTAND.
I THINK TRACKING THESE THINGS
WOULD BE GREAT IF IT STAYS IN
AT TWENTY TWENTY SEVEN A YEAR
BUT SURE WHETHER WE THANK YOU
FOR SAYING A LOT OF THINGS VERY
COHERENTLY THAT HAVE BEEN IN MY
HEAD TOO.
AND THEN I THINK WITH YOUR
SUGGESTION OF LIKE WE'LL BE
VISITING THIS EVERY YEAR AND
THINGS CAN ALWAYS BE FOLDED
BACK IN I THINK MAYBE WITH THE
NEW CRITERIA THIS SAW THE
BIGGEST SHAKEUP AND THIS IS A
GOOD OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO
REALLY DIG IN AND AND FOR NEXT
YEAR COME BACK WITH WE BE TO
DOESN'T HAVE SIDEWALKS.
CAN I HAVE THEM LIKE THAT
SOMEWHERE ANYWHERE.
BUT IF THERE ARE THOSE LIKE
REALLY HIGH PROFILE PROJECTS
LIKE THE ODDS THAT THIS
UNDERPASS WOULD HAVE BEEN DONE
IN NY TWENTY SIX WAS NEVER ON
FOREVER.
TWENTY SIX RIGHT.
SO I JUST WANTED TO MAKE SURE A
LOT OF THIS WAS KIND OF NOT
CAUSED BY THE NEW SCORING
CRITERIA KIND OF LIKE A
RESHUFFLE.
>> A LOT OF THESE PRIORITIES
THINGS THAT YOU'RE GOING TO DO
COMMISSIONER NORTON,
COMMISSIONER ADAMS SO I WANT TO
REITERATE I TOTALLY GET HOW
MUCH OF A CHALLENGE YOU HAVE IN
ALL OF THESE PROJECTS PUT
TOGETHER THAT YOUR PROCESS HAS
BEEN QUITE ROBUST.
BUT I WOULD POINT OUT THERE IS
A ROLE FOR US TO PLAY AND
REVIEWING THIS AND FINDING
THINGS AND THERE'S A ROLE FOR
THE PUBLIC TO PLAY IN REVIEWING
AND MAKING PUBLIC COMMENTS AND
REALLY ONLY OF THE FIVE HUNDRED
AND TWO PROJECTS, THE ONLY TWO
THAT HAVE POPPED UP HAVE BEEN
THESE TWO DAYS.
SO IT'S NOT LIKE WE'RE TEARING
APART THE PLAN AND EVERYTHING
THAT'S GOING ON AND IT SOUNDS
TO ME LIKE THEY'RE PRETTY VALID
REASONS FOR WHY THESE TWO
THINGS ARE POPPING UP ON THE
TABLE AND RAISING QUESTIONS.
AND IF I HEARD COMMISSIONER
MILLS CORRECTLY, IT WAS IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN TO WORRY
ABOUT THE UNDERPASS.
SO I'M ACTUALLY OK WITH
APPROVING IT WITH THE REQUEST
THAT IN NEXT YEAR WE REVISIT
THAT AND PULL IT UP AND THINK
ABOUT IT MORE CAREFULLY BECAUSE
I THINK IT'S BEEN UNDER SOMEHOW
IT GOT LOST IN THE MIX IN A WAY
THAT ALL OF US WHO EXPERIENCED
THAT INTERSECTION JUST CAN'T
BELIEVE AND IT'S NOT THAT IT'S
JUST MY INTERSECTION.
I WANT I WANT IT TO BE FIXED
AND BIKED OVER MOST OF THE CITY
.
I CAN TELL YOU THAT'S ONE
OF THE MOST DANGEROUS
INTERSECTIONS DEBATE AND I
THINK THE OTHER BIKERS WOULD
AGREE WITH THAT.
>> THERE'S SOMETHING FOR
EXPERIENCE ACCOUNTS.
RIGHT.
SO SO I DON'T KNOW WHAT TO SAY
ABOUT THE SUNSET THING BUT AS
FAR AS THAT I'M OK WITH
APPROVING THE PLAN WITH THE
REQUEST THAT WE WERE BUSY AT
THAT PARTICULAR INTERSECTION
NEXT YEAR WHEN WE GO THROUGH
THIS PROCESS AGAIN AND MAYBE
ASK IF POSSIBLE I KNOW THIS IS
A HUGE AMOUNT OF WORK FOR YOU
BUT INSTEAD OF IT FEELING LIKE
WE'RE ONLY GETTING THIS THIS IS
A VERY LAST MINUTE AND WE DON'T
EITHER CAN APPROVE OR DENY THAT
SOME WAY TO HAVE MORE
MEANINGFUL INPUT EARLIER IN THE
PROCESS SO THAT WE CAN FEEL
LIKE WE'RE MAKING A MEANINGFUL
INPUT.
IT WOULD BE REALLY HELPFUL.
AND FINALLY, THANK YOU FOR ALL
OF YOUR WORK AND I TOTALLY GET
HOW CHALLENGING ALL OF THIS IS
AND AND DON'T WANT IT.
I WANT THIS TO COME ACROSS AS
CRITIQUING YOU BUT THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
THANK MR. ADAMS.
>> I MEAN I THINK AT THE RISK
OF REPEATING MYSELF, I'D PREFER
TO PROCEED WITH A MOTION TO
POSTPONE THAT AND AND I'M
SAYING THAT LARGELY WITH
RESPECT TO THE ISSUE THAT I
RAISED LESS WITH RESPECT TO THE
ISSUES WITH THE BRIDGES IN THE
UNDERPASSES PARTIALLY THE FIRST
OF ALL, I THINK WE CAN I DON'T
THINK WE I MEAN IT'S AN EXTRA
FEW WEEKS BUT LIKE WE CAN THE
SECOND THING IS THIS HAS GONE
ON FOR IN THE CASE OF THE
SUNSET PROJECT FOR FOUR YEARS
AND IT WAS AN ADMINISTRATIVE
DECISION THAT ULTIMATELY CAUSED
A DEVIATION FROM A
PRIORITIZATION SCHEME THAT
STAFF COUNCIL THERE'S A LOT
OF PARTICIPATION THAT WENT INTO
HOW THESE SIDEWALK PROJECTS ARE
RANKED.
THIS PROJECT GOT TAKEN OUT
OF THE Q RIGHT.
SO A DECISION WAS MADE THAT IT
WAS VERY HIGH PRIORITY.
SECOND ON THE LIST RIGHT.
A SECOND TRANCHE OF PROJECTS
AND NOW IS OFF IN TWENTY THIRTY
.
SO I WANT THIS PROJECT
RECONSIDERED
STANDALONE AND I
FEEL VERY STRONGLY ABOUT THAT.
SO IF IF NECESSARY I'LL MAKE
THE MOTION TO POSTPONE AND GET
A VOTE ON THAT AND IF IT GETS
VOTED DOWN IT GETS VOTED DOWN.
BUT I THINK THIS PROJECT NEEDS
TO GET SEPARATED FROM THIS
THING THAT WE CAN'T FUND AND
RECONSIDERED ACCORDING TO ITS
PRIORITY UNDER THE CITY'S
AGREED ESTABLISHED
PRIVATIZATION SCHEME AND I
DON'T WANT TO DEVIATE FROM THAT
IF STAFF COMES BACK AND SAYS
THIS PROJECT IS ACTUALLY HERE,
THAT'S FINE.
BUT I THINK IN ADDITION TO THE
FACT OF ITS SCORING FROM A PURE
SAFETY PERSPECTIVE, THE FACT
THAT WE'VE ALREADY SPENT THIRTY
TO FORTY THOUSAND DOLLARS ON
THE PLANS THAT EXIST THAT
MATTERS AND I WANT THAT TAKEN
INTO CONSIDERATION AS WELL.
>> THANK YOU.
>> COMMISSIONER MILLS, DID YOU
WANT TO ADD ONE FINAL THOUGHT?
MY FINAL THOUGHT IS IN APRIL OR
WHENEVER WE SEE YOU NEXT.
THIS IS A FOLLOW UP TO
COMMISSIONER NORTON WAS SAYING
IF WE HAVE THAT FULL LIST
OF THINGS THAT ARE ON HOLD, I
THINK THAT WOULD BE REALLY
HELPFUL AND ALSO THE FULL LIST
OF THE THINGS THAT ARE
LINGERING FOR A WHILE BECAUSE I
THINK THAT OR THAT SEEMED TO
MOVE SIGNIFICANTLY DOWN IN THIS
WALK, YOU KNOW, REPRIVATIZATION
I THINK THAT WILL HELP US FLAG
A COUPLE OF THINGS.
SO THANK YOU FOR THAT.
I I'M OF THE MIND TOO THAT THIS
STUFF PROBABLY WOULDN'T BE
FUNDED THIS YEAR ANYWAY AND SO
MAKING SURE THAT WE DON'T LOSE
SIGHT OF THIS NEXT TIME MAKE
SENSE TO ME.
GOT IT WITH THAT I THINK WE'VE
HAD PLENTY OF DISCUSSION ON IT
SO I'M GOING TO WAIT FOR MOTION
AND WOULD ANYONE LIKE TO MAKE A
MOTION MEASURE?
>> ALL RIGHT.
DO I HAVE A SECOND NOBODY TO
FEBRUARY 4TH.
CORRECT TO HAVE A SECOND
COMMISSIONER WHICH WE ARE GOING
TO THIS IS ON A DISCUSSION
OF YES.
JUST FOR THE PURPOSE
OF ADDRESSING THIS.
WE'RE RESPONDING TO THAT
PARTICULAR AND I'M EXHAUSTED
TOO.
>> WHAT DO YOU NEED TO DO FOR
PEOPLE?
I THINK STAFF FEEDBACK AS WELL
ON WHAT FEEDBACK THAT THEY CAN
PROVIDE BACK ON THE OTHER ISSUE
AS WELL.
I THINK THAT WE OUGHT TO USE A
NEXT, YOU KNOW, THREE TO FOUR
WEEKS TO ANSWER SOME OF THE
QUESTIONS AND RESPOND TO SOME
OF THE FEEDBACK THAT'S BEEN
RAISED.
I THINK MY ISSUE IS MORE
DISCREET.
THE OTHER ISSUE IS MORE
COMPLICATED.
BUT THE TIME I THINK WE'RE
BENEFITED BY THAT TIME AND WE
SHOULD TAKE IT.
>> KOSMIDIS I THINK I THINK
THAT ONE LITTLE PIECE OF IT'S
NOT THAT COMPLICATED ABOUT THE
UNDERPASS THING IS THE QUESTION
OF THE STATEMENT IN THE VISION
ZERO PLAN AND HOW WAS STAFF
INTERPRETING THAT STATEMENT OR
HOW SHOULD WE BE INTERPRETING
IT GOGIA?
AND TO CLARIFY RIGHT NOW WE ARE
IN THE MOTION TO POSTPONE THE
FEBRUARY 4TH AND WE'RE IN
DISCUSSION OF THAT.
>> SO DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER
COMMENTS FROM COMMISSIONERS
REGARDING THIS PARTICULAR
MOTION?
>> OK WITH THAT?
I THINK THIS IS A ROLL CALL OR
SOME POINTS FOR TO POSTPONE.
>> IT'S OK VOICE VOTE ALL THOSE
IN FAVOR SAY I OK HOW MANY IS
THAT?
SORRY I ACTUALLY NEED YOU TO
PUT YOUR HANDS UP.
ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR OK AND
THEN ALL THOSE AGAINST RAISE
YOUR HANDS ONE, TWO, THREE,
FOUR SO THE MOTION FAILS MOTION
FAILS OK.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE BACK TO THE ORIGINAL
MOTION OF THE MOTION THAT WAS
READ REGARDING MISSISSIPPI HAS
BEEN DRAFTED BY CITY AS A
CATEGORY TEAMS AND REVIEWED BY
THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
RESOLVE THAT WE APPROVE THE
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN AND
RESOLVED THAT WE RECOMMEND THAT
THE CITY COUNCIL APPROVE THE
TWENTY SIX THIRTY ONE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS AS THE BASIS FOR
THE TWENTY SIX AND TWENTY SEVEN
CAPITAL BUDGET.
>> SO WE'RE IN THAT MOTION
RIGHT NOW.
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER MOTIONS
WITH RESPECT TO MODIFICATION
COMMISSIONER ELSE IF WE WANT IT
WANTED IT TO GO WITH A MEMO
THAT EFFECTIVELY SAYS LIKE
LET'S MAKE SURE THAT IN THE
SPRING WE DO THESE THINGS EARLY
THAT WE TAKE UP SUNSET, THAT WE
TAKE UP WHAT WE ACTUALLY MEAN
BY FULLER AND MADEN
TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS
THAT WE LOOK AT THE LIST
OF THINGS WHAT IS THE
APPROPRIATE MECHANISM TO MAKE
SURE THAT THAT HAPPENS?
DO I NEED TO LIKE SO SO YOU ARE
PROPOSING A CONDITION TO THE
MOTION THAT WHEN THIS IS
TRANSMITTED TO THE CITY COUNCIL
IT COMES WITH THE COMMUNICATION
THAT IN ADVANCE OF THE NEXT
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN REVIEW
WHICH WOULD BE NEXT YEAR THAT
THE PLANNING COMMISSION HAS AN
EARLIER DIALOG TO TALK ABOUT
SPECIFICALLY THE SUNSET
SIDEWALK PROJECT INDEPENDENT
OF OTHER PROJECTS AND THE
UNDERPASS FOR THE BORDER TO
WORK.
>> AND I WOULD SUGGEST THAT IT
MIGHT BE USEFUL FOR US TO ALSO
HAVE THAT LIST OF ALL THE
PROJECTS ON HOLD AND THE MOLDY
OLD ONES IN THE BEYOND CATEGORY
.
>> WE CAN DEFINITELY WE CAN
DEFINITELY DO THAT COUNCIL
MEMBER DISH.
>> I DON'T WANT TO MAKE A
MOTION OR A CONDITION TO VOTING
ON THE PLAN OR NO ON THE PLAN
AS THE CASE MAY BE.
>> BUT I WOULD LIKE TO MAKE A
REQUEST THAT THE INFORMATION
THAT WAS FORESEEN AS THE
RATIONALE FOR A POSTPONEMENT
ACCOMPANY THE PLAN WHEN IT'S
COMMUNICATED TO COUNCIL.
>> IS THAT POSSIBLE OR IS IT
NOT POSSIBLE?
YEAH I I CAN DRAFT A
CORRESPONDENCE THAT I IT WOULD
BE MY REFLECTION OF THE
CORRESPONDENCE THE CONVERSATION
HERE AND IT WOULD I WOULD
HIGHLIGHT THE EXPANSION
OF SCOPE OF THE SUNSET
SIDEWALK.
>> HOW FRANKLY PROCESS ENDED UP
WITH THAT BEING LUMPED INTO A
MUCH LARGER PROJECT THAT GOT IT
FURTHER AND FURTHER OUT WHERE
IT BECAME NO LONGER A SEEMINGLY
VIABLE PROJECT ON THE HORIZON.
THE SEEMING DISCONNECT
OF UNDERSTANDING WHAT THE
MOVING TOGETHER AND SAYS AND
THE PUTTING THE UNDERPASS ON
HOLD MORE RATIONAL ABOUT THAT
HOW THAT SHOULD BE A PRIORITY
FULL STOP I THINK I WOULD ADD
COME BACK TO THIS COMMISSION
TOWARDS STARTED TOWARDS
COMMISSIONER MILLS'S WE CAN
PROVIDE ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
ABOUT THAT DISTINCTION AND WHY
WE DON'T ENVISION A FUNDING
SOURCE FOR IT OVER THE NEXT SIX
YEARS AND THEN SO YOU'RE
BASICALLY SORT OF ASKING THAT
EVEN IF THE PLAN WERE ADOPTED
THAT IT COMES WITH SORT OF A
BIT OF A ALTERNATIVE OPINION
FROM THE PLANNING COMMISSION ON
SOME OF THOSE SPECIFIC ISSUES
OR JUST INFORMATION FROM STAFF
THAT IS MORE HYPOTHETICAL IN
NATURE BECAUSE THE PLAN
COMMISSION COMMISSION'S ALREADY
VOTED ON THE PLAN SO IT WOULD
BE HYPOTHETICALLY IF WE WERE TO
REWRITE CAMP I SIDEWALK YEAH.
>> I'D BE HAPPY TO BRING THAT
LANGUAGE TO YOU.
YOU COULD CONSIDER THAT
LANGUAGE BEFORE IT'S
TRANSMITTED AS WELL.
>> THAT WOULD BE GREAT.
AND THEN JUST ALSO THAT HERE'S
HOW WE INTERPRETED THAT PASSAGE
IN THIS VISION ZERO WHEN WE
LOOKED AT THE UNDERPASS
PROJECTS OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT
.
>> JUST THE INFORMATION I THINK
PROBABLY BEST ON BOTH ACCOUNTS
THAT I COULD BRING THOSE BACK
FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION.
>> THAT WOULD BE GREAT.
THANK YOU.
SO AS OF THIS PARTICULAR
MOTION, DO WE WE NEED A
MODIFICATION?
>> ARE CONDITIONS SET?
IS THAT CORRECT, MR. LEARNER?
I WOULD I WOULD SUGGEST IF YOU
WANT TO PROCEED MODIFY THE
MOTION THAT IT WILL BE
ACCOMPANIED BY A MEMORANDUM TO
BE APPROVED BY THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TO ACCOMPANY ITS
TRANSMITTAL TO THE CITY COUNCIL
AND THEN WE'LL BRING THAT BACK
TO YOU FOR CONSIDERATION AND
THEN THAT WILL FORMALLY
ACCOMPANY THE WHEN IT GOES TO
THE CITY COUNCIL AND THEN WE
WOULD START THE CONVERSATION
ABOUT HOW WE HOW YOU ROLL UP
YOUR SLEEVES NEXT YEAR TO SPEND
MORE TIME EARLIER.
>> YES, OK.
GOT SO EFFECTIVELY KIND OF A
LIKE SOMEWHAT OF A FUNCTIONAL
POSTPONEMENT IN ESSENCE,
COMMISSIONER, WHY IT COULD BE
IT WOULD STILL BE APPROVED IT
WOULD BASICALLY STAY IN STATUS
AND UNTIL THAT MEMO WAS DONE
AND THEN THEY WOULD BOTH COME
THEY BOTH GO IN TOGETHER ONTO A
FUTURE CITY COUNCIL WHICH KNOW
OK, GOT IT UNDERSTOOD.
>> BUT IT WOULD TO KILL AS MANY
I WOULD GIVE FRANKLY STAFF THE
ABILITY TO UNDERSTAND THAT WE
HAVE A PRETTY GOOD SENSE
OF WHAT THE CFP IS GOING TO SAY
FOR THE NEXT TWO YEARS FOR OUR
PLANNING PURPOSES.
>> OK, GOT IT.
THANK YOU MR. RIGHT.
SO JUST TO CLARIFY, MR.
LEONARD, WHEN I HAVE ASKED FOR
THE VERY THING WE'RE ABOUT TO
DO FOR THIS, YOU HAVE SAID THAT
THIS IS NOT INAPPROPRIATE
COMMUNICATION FOR THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TO PASS TO COUNCIL.
YOU HAVE SAID THAT COUNCIL GETS
OUR MENTS AND THEY SEE OUR
ACTION AS THE TABLE.
>> CAN YOU HELP ME UNDERSTAND
WHAT THE DIFFERENCE IS NOW
YOU'VE USED OTHER MEMOS
RECENTLY YOU ADVANCED A REPORT
ON HOME OCCUPATIONS TO THE THAT
WAS A DIRECT REQUEST FROM
COUNCIL.
>> YOU SO WHAT I'M SPECIFICALLY
TALKING ABOUT IS AN ACTION
BECAUSE WHAT WE'RE TAKING WE'RE
JUST TAKING A VOTE.
>> YEP.
AND THAT VOTE IS GOING TO BE
THE ACTION.
YOUR MEMO EXACTLY.
>> CAN BE CONSIDERED OR
DISREGARDED BY THE YOU HAVE
BEEN VERY PARTICULAR BECAUSE I
HAVE ASKED FOR THIS SEVERAL
TIMES AT THE TABLE.
YOU'VE BEEN VERY PARTICULAR TO
SAY THAT IT IS INAPPROPRIATE
FOR US TO DO THAT BECAUSE
COUNCIL MAKES ITS OWN DECISIONS
AND THAT THEY GET OUR MINUTES
AND THEY SEE OUR ACTION.
SO I'M JUST FOR MY FOR MY
UNDERSTANDING BOTH AS VICE
CHAIR AND AS A MEMBER OF THE
THE COMMISSION I'M JUST TRYING
TO UNDERSTAND
WHY IN THIS CASE
IT IS NOW PERMISSIBLE FOR US TO
TAKE THIS ACTION.
>> WELL, MAYBE I'M MISTAKEN.
WHAT I CAN DO IS HAVE THE CITY
ATTORNEY PROVIDE ADVICE IN THIS
CASE AGAIN, LIKE IF YOU WERE
TAKING A RECOMMENDATION ON AN
ACTION LIKE SAY SAY YOU WANT TO
MAKE A RECOMMENDATION ON
REZONING TO THE CITY COUNCIL,
YOU SHOULD MAKE THAT ACTION AND
THAT ACTION AS YOUR DUTY AS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION IS TO MAKE
THAT RECOMMENDATION.
I WOULD NOT RECOMMEND THAT YOU
FORWARD A RECOMMENDATION FOR WE
RECOMMEND APPROVAL THEN IT
ACCOMPANIES WITH A MEMO THAT
SAYS BUT WE DON'T REALLY MEAN
IT.
SO I WOULD NOT RECOMMEND THAT
IN THIS CASE YOU ARE ADOPTING A
PLAN AND THAT PLAN IS GOING TO
BE PRESENTED TO THEM AS YOUR
VOICE.
YOU ARE APPROVING THE CAIB IN
THIS CASE IT'S NOT IT'S GOING
TO HAVE NOT GOING TO HAVE THE
SUNSET SIDEWALK ON IT.
IT IS NOT GOING TO HAVE THE
UNDERPASS PRESUMING IT PASSES
CONSEQUENTIALLY YOU ARE GOING
TO THEN THIS CONDITION IS
DIRECTING ME TO BRING A MEMO
BACK TO YOU THAT YOU WERE GOING
TO FORWARD TO THE CITY COUNCIL
AND SAY BY THE WAY, NEXT TIME
WE WE INTEND TO SEND YOU A
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN THAT
IS GOING TO HAVE THESE PROJECTS
IN IT AND IT MAY BE HERE
REGARDLESS OF OTHER
PRIORITIZATION SCORING THAT WE
CONSIDER.
YEAH, I'M AND I CAN TAKE THIS
OFFLINE TO TALK MORE TO
UNDERSTAND WHY IN THIS CASE
IT'S PERMISSIBLE BECAUSE THERE
I THIS AGAIN IS STILL JUST A
DECISION OF THE TABLE AND BUT
NOW WE ARE MAKING A DECISION
CLOSER TO THE CITY ATTORNEY AND
THEN SENDING THEM OK, EVEN
THOUGH COUNCIL IS ITS OWN BODY
AND SO THE COUNCIL DOESN'T HAVE
ANY AGENCY OVER THIS DECISION.
>> IT DOES THROUGH THE BUDGET
ONLY BUT IT HAS THAT AGENCY
REGARDLESS AGAIN.
>> SO IF THAT DISTINCTION IS
BECAUSE THEY DON'T HAVE BUT THE
I GUESS LEGISLATIVE ACTION ON
THIS IS US, THEN WE CAN DO
THAT.
I MEAN ALL I'M TRYING TO
UNDERSTAND IS WHY IN THE PAST
WHEN I HAVE ASKED THIS HAS BEEN
IMPERMISSIBLE BUT NOW IT IS I
ACTUALLY AND THAT'S FOR HELPING
ME WITH GUIDANCE FOR WHEN
SOMETHING LIKE THIS COMES AGAIN
SO THAT I I HAVE A BETTER
UNDERSTANDING OF IT AND IT'S IT
COULD BE SOMETHING THAT COULD
BE OFFLINE.
YEAH.
THAT IS A CITY ATTORNEY COULD
PICK UP AND THEN SAY IN THESE
CASES THIS IS WHAT WE WOULD
RECOMMEND IN THESE CASES WE
WOULDN'T RECOMMEND IT SO THAT
WE HAVE A STANDARD MR.
UNDERRATING COMMISSIONER RIGHT
HERE FOR THAT PLEASE LET'S TAKE
THAT ONE OFFLINE.
>> THANK YOU.
IF I COULD WITH YOUR FIFTEEN
SECONDS.
OK, YOU DON'T HAVE TO THIS MEMO
MEANS NOTHING.
YOUR ACTION IS THE SIPPY CUP.
YOU HAVE FULL AGENCY TO MAKE
THOSE CHANGES NEXT YEAR.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO TELEGRAPH
THAT TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
>> SO I WOULD JUST NEVER
UNDERSTAND WOULD IT BE
REASONABLE TO TAKE A THREE
MINUTE BREAK EVEN ON THIS TOPIC
FOR QUITE SOME TIME YOU WOULD
LIKE TO VOTE?
I WAS OK.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SOUNDS GOOD.
OK, I'M GOING TO READ THE
MOTION JUST SO THAT WE'RE CLEAR
I'M GOING TO READ IT WORD FOR
WORD THERE JUST A SECOND.
OK, THE PROPOSED MOTION IS THAT
WHEREAS SECTION ONE ONE EIGHT
FIVE THE ANTIPATHETIC
CODE REQUIRES THAT THE CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION ANNUALLY
PREPARE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
PLAN IDENTIFYING PUBLIC
IMPROVEMENTS THAT WILL BE
NEEDED WITHIN THE ENSUING SIX
YEARS IN THE GENERAL ORDER
PRIORITY WHEREAS THE TWENTY SIX
THE FISCAL YEAR TWENTY SIX AND
THIRTY ONE HAS BEEN DRAFTED BY
THE CITY AS A CATEGORY TEAMS
REVIEWED BY THE CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION AND RESOLVED THAT
THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
HEREBY APPROVES THE TWENTY TO
THIRTY ONE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
PLAN AND RESOLVED THAT THE CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDS
THE CITY COUNCIL APPROVE THE
TWENTY SIX THIRTY ONE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS PLAN AS THE BASIS
FOR THE TWENTY SIX AND TWENTY
SEVEN CAPITAL BUDGET.
>> NO MODIFICATIONS ARE
CONDITIONS EVERYBODY CLEARLY
UNDERSTAND BUT THAT WILL GO TO
A ROLL CALL VOTE
COUNCIL
AMBERLY OH COMMISSIONER
COMMISSIONER COMMISSIONER.
YEAH THANKS.
LIKE I KNOW WE WERE TALKING YES
MY APOLOGIES COMMISSIONER WAGE
NO COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT
YES COMMISSIONER.
>> YES COMMISSIONER MILLS' YES.
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE.
YES.
>> COMMISSIONER ATOM'S KNOW
COMMISSIONER NORTON YES.
>> THE PLAN PASSES OK THANK
YOU.
JUST A NOTE TO STAFF.
LET'S DEFINITELY VISIT THAT
MORE ENGAGED MEANINGFUL
ENGAGEMENT PRIOR TO THANK YOU.
>> OK ARE WE MOVING ON TO THE
NEXT ITEM EVERYBODY'S OK ON A
ENERGY BASIS.
>> OK LET'S KEEP GOING.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
AGENDA NUMBER NINE B THIS IS
THREE SEVEN ONE STYLE CHURCH
ROAD ANNEXATIONS SIDE PLAN AND
REZONING FOR CITY COUNCIL
APPROVAL A PROPOSAL TO REZONE
THE FOUR VACANT PARCELS SIX
POINT THREE ACRES TO R FOUR E
MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL FOR
THE CONSTRUCTION OF SEVENTY
FIVE RESIDENTIAL TOWNHOUSE
UNITS IN TWELVE NEW BUILDINGS
THERE WILL BE ONE HUNDRED SIXTY
SEVEN PARKING SPACES ON SITE
WITH GARAGES AND SURFACE
PARKING IS ACCESSED THROUGH ONE
CENTRAL DRIVE TO CHURCH PROVAL
WITH THAT WE'RE GOING TO GO TO
PETITIONER PRESENTATION WITH
THE ROBERTSON BROTHERS HOMES.
WELCOME.
THANK YOU.
GOOD TO SEE YOU AGAIN.
IT'S BEEN A WHILE TO WALK
AROUND WITH ROBERTSON HOMES SIX
NINE ZERO FIVE TELEGRAPH ROAD
IN BLOOMFIELD.
I'VE GOT A PRESENTATION INDULGE
ME I THINK I HAVE TO BRING IT
UP HERE THOUGH MATT YOU'RE
PERFECTLY FINE IF YOU WILL
EXCUSE US FOR OUR TECHNICAL
DIFFICULTIES.
YOUR ABSENCE OK, WE'RE GOOD.
SO OK SO AGAIN THANK YOU FOR
YOUR TIME.
>> APPRECIATE IT.
IT'S GOOD TO SEE YOU ALL AGAIN
.
SO WE'RE HERE TODAY TO PRESENT
THE SEVENTY FIVE S MAIN PROJECT
S CHURCH ROAD AND OUR RECENTLY
ROAD BASICALLY SOUTHWEST CORNER
WEST OF THE SOUTHWEST CORNER
WE'VE WORKED ON THE SITE FOR A
WHILE SO IT TOOK US A WHILE TO
GET TO YOU BUT IT'S SOMETHING
WE'RE VERY EXCITED ABOUT AND I
LOVE TO WALK YOU THROUGH IT.
>> SO IT'S ACTUALLY CURRENTLY A
COUNTY ISLAND IN PITTSFIELD
TOWNSHIP SO IT'S ONE OF THE FEW
COUNTY ISLANDS YOU HAVE LEFT AS
YOU I'M SURE KNOW YOU'RE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
YOU KNOW THAT THE MASTER PLAN,
A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN HAS
GUIDELINES SPECIFICALLY FOR
THOSE TOWNSHIP ISLAND.
SO FOR INSTANCE, VILLAGE OF ANN
ARBOR WAS A ANN ARBOR TOWNSHIP
ISLAND AND THIS OF COURSE IS
PITTSVILLE TOWNSHIP ISLAND.
SO THE POINT IS REALLY TO CLEAN
THESE UP AS THEY GO WHEN
THERE'S UTILITIES AVAILABLE
WHICH THERE ARE.
SO IT'S BEEN LONG STANDING SITE
THERE AND WE'RE EXCITED TO
PROPOSE DEVELOPMENT ON THE
PROPERTY.
SO I MIGHT BE DIFFICULT TO SEE
BUT IT'S ABOUT SIX ACRES WE'RE
PROPOSING SEVENTY FIVE
TOWNHOMES.
THOSE WOULD BE THREE STOREY
TOWN HOMES SIMILAR TO WHAT WE
HAD APPROVED ON THE VILLAGE ANN
ARBOR JUST A LITTLE BIT
DIFFERENT ARCHITECTURE THERE
ABOUT SIXTEEN HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET, THREE BEDROOMS EACH AND
THEY'D HAVE TO ATTACHED TWO CAR
ATTACHED GARAGES FOR EACH ONE
OF THEM.
>> WE'VE WORKED HARD WITH STAFF
OVER THE LAST YEAR OR SO ON
MANY OF THE ASPECTS OF THE SITE
PLAN TO WHAT YOU SEE TODAY.
WE'VE ALSO WORKED WITH THE
NEIGHBORHOOD WE HAD A
NEIGHBORHOOD MEETING FOR
FEBRUARY TWENTY SECOND LAST
YEAR.
>> IT'S BEEN A WHILE AND I
THINK WE'VE MADE A LOT
OF IMPROVEMENTS TO THE PLAN AND
MADE IT MADE IT MUCH MORE MUCH
MORE BUILDABLE IN MANY
RESPECTS.
SO IT'S A DIFFICULT SITE JUST
IF YOU'RE LOOKING AT IT IT'S
VERY STRANGE.
THERE'S FOUR DIFFERENT PARCELS
TO DIFFERENT OWNERS.
WE TRIED OUR BEST TO TRY TO
ASSEMBLE A LITTLE BIT MORE
THERE TO MAKE IT A LITTLE MORE
COHESIVE BUT THAT'S WHAT WE
HAVE.
SO IT'S DIFFICULT TO DO THAT.
IT'S VERY LONG AND NARROW
OBVIOUSLY TO TWO STREETS WHICH
HAS MADE THINGS COMPLICATED
SUCH FIRE ACCESS AND THINGS
LIKE THAT.
SO THAT'S WHAT TOOK US A LOT
OF TIME TO MOVE THROUGH.
AS YOU'LL SEE, WE'VE REALLY
TRIED TO ADD UP QUITE A BIT
OF BUFFERING TO THE SURROUNDING
PROPERTY OWNERS, PARTICULARLY
ON THE WEST SIDE OUT THAT
NEIGHBORHOOD MEETING THERE WAS
QUITE A BIT OF DISCUSSION ON
JUST THE THE DIFFERENCE IN
PRODUCT AND DEVELOPMENT ON THE
SITE.
WHAT WE'VE DONE SINCE THAT
MEETING IS AT A LOT TREES AS
YOU'LL SEE.
IN FACT THERE'S ALMOST THERE'S
A DOUBLE ORATORIES AND MANY
RESPECTS TO THOSE ADJACENT
PROPERTIES.
THOSE HOMES ARE PRETTY CLOSE.
THOSE ARE DUPLEX HOMES.
SO THERE'S DETACHED RESIDENTIAL
AS WELL.
THEY'RE PRETTY CLOSE TO THE
PROPERTY LINE.
WE'VE MOVED OUR UNITS FIVE FEET
EVEN FURTHER THAN WHAT WE
ORIGINALLY HAD.
SO THERE'S A TWENTY FIVE FOOT
SET BACK TO THE PROPERTY LINE
ALONG THAT WESTERN BOUNDARY
PLUS THE DOUBLE ROLL PLANTINGS
FOR MOST OF THAT SECTION.
SO WE FEEL THAT THAT'S THAT'S
QUITE A BIT OF BUFFER AGAIN
MORE OF A SETBACK THAN WHAT'S
THERE BUT THE ADJACENT
PROPERTIES AND THEN A LOT
OF LANDSCAPE BUFFERING AND THEN
AS YOU GO FURTHER DOWN ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT WAS VERY
IMPORTANT TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD I
KNOW THE CAROLS CAN ATTEST TO
THIS THEY'RE HERE TONIGHT.
>> WE HAD AT ONE POINT THOUGHT
ABOUT CONNECTING FROM OUR
PROPERTY TO AUDOBON WHICH IS A
PRIVATE STREET.
THEY HAD NO INTEREST IN THAT
WHATSOEVER AND IT WOULD HAVE
HELPED US FROM A FIRE ACCESS
STANDPOINT PROBABLY WOULD HAVE
HELPED WITH SOME SOLID WASTE
COMMENTS.
BUT AT THE END OF THE DAY THEY
WERE ADAMANT ABOUT IT.
WE UNDERSTAND IT.
SO WE DID NOT PUSH THAT ISSUE.
THERE'S A LOT OF GREAT THERE
TOO AS WELL.
TO MAKE THAT WORK WAS A
CHALLENGE BUT WE DID HAVE A
PLAN AT ONE POINT BUT CERTAINLY
WE WANTED TO RESPECT THE WISHES
OF OUR NEIGHBORS THERE SO WE'RE
NOT PROPOSING ANY MORE ACCESS
THERE AND THAT'S REALLY AT THE
BOTTOM OF AUDOBON AS IT
CONNECTS.
>> THAT'S WHERE I'M TALKING
ABOUT ONE OF THE OTHER.
THE OTHER THING I MISSED AS FAR
AS A BUFFER WE ARE PROPOSING
A
SIX FOOT FENCE DECORATIVE FENCE
ALONG THE PROPERTY LINE AS WELL
FOR A LITTLE BIT ADDITIONAL
BUFFERING.
OBVIOUSLY NOT.
THERE'S NOTHING THERE RIGHT
NOW.
SO THAT WOULD BE ADJACENT TO
WHERE THE THE TWO BUILDINGS ARE
WHICH IS TWO DUPLEXES.
THE OTHER THING I WANT TO POINT
OUT AND THIS WAS NOT IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD MEETING THERE WAS
A LOT OF COMMENTS ABOUT THIS
TRYING TO GET A PEDESTRIAN
ACCESS TO ANN ARBOR SELINE
ROAD.
IT WAS VERY DIFFICULT TO DO AND
THE STORM PONDS THERE BECAUSE
THAT'S REALLY WHERE THE STORM
WANTS TO BE AND YOU REALLY
COULDN'T FIT UNITS THERE AND
STORM UPON OBVIOUSLY AND THAT
JUST WAS ENOUGH ROOM TO FIT THE
STORM AND SO WE DID NOT HAVE
ROOM TO PUT A SIDEWALK OR A
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTION THERE.
BUT I KNOW IT WAS VERY
IMPORTANT IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
MEETING.
WE HEARD QUITE A BIT ABOUT THAT
AND IT WAS IMPORTANT TO US TOO.
IT MAKES SENSE FROM A PLANNING
PERSPECTIVE.
I'M A PLANNER BY TRADE.
IT MAKES SENSE TO HAVE A
CONNECTION BECAUSE PEOPLE ARE
NOT GOING TO WALK ALL THE WAY
OVER TO THE INTERSECTION TO
COME DOWN SO WE WERE ABLE TO
SQUEEZE IT IN.
OUR ENGINEER WORKED WITH THE
COUNTY WATER RESOURCES TO WORK
THROUGH THE CALCULATIONS AND
ABLE TO SQUEEZE A FIVE FOOT
SIDEWALK SO IT DOESN'T SOUND
LIKE MUCH TO US.
IT WAS REALLY IMPORTANT TO TO
SQUEEZE THAT IN SO I'M HAPPY TO
REPORT THAT WE DO HAVE THAT
THERE AND IT GOES ALONG THE
SOUTH SIDE OF THE STORM WATER
POND.
IT ACTUALLY KIND OF JOGS UP AND
ACROSS JUST BECAUSE OF GRADE.
THAT'S THE BEST WE CAN DO.
BUT I THINK IT WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT TO PROVIDE CONNECTION
SO WE'RE HAPPY TO HAVE THAT.
THEY'RE JUST GOING THROUGH THE
SIDE DATA TABLE A LITTLE BIT.
I NOTICE THAT I HAVE SOMETHING
INCORRECT THERE.
>> I KNOW YOU GUYS WERE GOING
TO CALL ME OUT ON IT.
>> YOU'RE THE SITE PLAN THAT
WE'D SUBMIT IS CORRECT THAT
STAFFS STAFF REPORT IS CORRECT.
I DON'T HAVE THAT MANY PARKING
SPACES.
IT'S ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
WHICH IS I KNOW COMMISSIONER
WHICH WAS GOING TO ASK ME THIS
QUESTION AS A MATTER OF FACT.
>> SO IT'S A HUNDRED FIFTY
OBVIOUSLY THE TWO IN EACH
GARAGE AND THEN SEVENTEEN GUEST
SPACES SO THAT'S THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT I, I HAD
INCORRECT ON HERE AND I
APOLOGIZE FOR THAT.
BUT ALL THE ALL THE PLANS ARE
CORRECT.
THAT'S ABOUT TWO POINT TWO
SPACES PER UNIT AND THIS
DOESN'T CALL IT THE EV CHARGERS
THEY'LL BE V CHARGERS IN THE
GARAGES FOR THOSE CARS AND THEN
FOUR OF THE GUEST SPACES WOULD
HAVE EV CHARGERS AS WELL.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING MORE THAN
HAPPY TO DO.
AND THEN REALLY THE THING I
WANT TO FOCUS ON IS JUST THE
OVERALL OPEN SPACE.
IT'S ALMOST FIFTY PERCENT OPEN
SPACE WHICH IS A LOT OF OPEN
SPACE PARTICULARLY FOR THIS
TYPE OF PRODUCT IN THIS KIND
OF CONFIGURATION OF OF
OF SITES.
SO WE'RE HAPPY THAT FORTY NINE
PERCENT I THINK IS SOMETHING
THAT THAT'S GOING TO BE A
BENEFIT TO NOT ONLY THE
RESIDENTS BUT THE SURROUNDING
NEIGHBORS AND THE CITY AS A
WHOLE.
SO HAPPY TO AS WE GO FORWARD
AND ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS
SPECIFIC ON THE ON THE SITE
PLAN.
BUT THOSE ARE SORT OF THE
HIGHLIGHTS I WANTED TO POINT
OUT FROM A SECOND TEXT I THINK
YOU ALL KNOW THE LOCATION AGAIN
IT'S KIND OF A STRANGE AREA
THAT IT'S STILL A COUNTY ISLAND
SORRY TOWNSHIP ISLAND SOUTH
OF PIONEER HIGH SCHOOL, ALSO
CHURCH.
THERE'S A LITTLE BIT THAT'S
DEVELOPED ALREADY AT THE CORNER
THE MASTER PLAN CALLS FOR AND
I'LL SHOW IT IN THE NEXT SLIDE
BUT MORE MORE OFFICE AND
COMMERCIAL AT THE CORNER FADING
TO ATTACH RESIDENTIAL WHICH IS
EXACTLY WHAT WE'RE PROPOSING.
AND THEN THERE'S ATTACHED
RESIDENTIAL TO THE DIRECT WEST
OF US THAT THAT'S THE AUDOBON
STREET AS I MENTIONED AND THEN
SINGLE FAMILY AS YOU GO FURTHER
WEST.
SO IT'S JUST KIND OF A LOGICAL
INTEGRATION OF LAND USES AS YOU
AS YOU MOVE WEST FROM THERE AND
AGAIN IT MEETS THE MASTER PLAN
WHICH IS KIND OF CALLED OUT
HERE AGAIN THIS IS VERY OLD
LANGUAGE OBVIOUSLY BUT
SPECIFICALLY THE MASTER PLAN
CALLS OUT THESE SPECIFIC
TOWNSHIP ISLANDS EACH ONE HAS
LIKE A CERTAIN SITE.
NO.
AND THIS IS JUST A SITE ONE IN
THIS AREA.
SO IT TALKS ABOUT IT AND IT'S
NOT IT'S HARD TO SEE IT'S
HIGHLIGHTED BY AGAIN IT CALLS
OUT IT'S NOT SPECIFIC ON
DENSITY.
IT'S NOT SPECIFIC ON HEIGHT.
IT'S NOT SPECIFIC ON A LOT
OF THOSE THINGS BUT IT CALLS
OUT ATTACH SINGLE FAMILY USES
WEST AND SOUTH OF THE OFFICE
USES WHICH OF COURSE THAT'S
WHERE WE'RE AT IN THIS LITTLE
SECTION HERE.
SO WE BELIEVE THAT WE MEET THE
MASTER PLAN SO TO STAFF QUICKLY
ON THE SUMMARY AS I MENTIONED
ABOUT SIX ACRES ABOUT 12 TO 13
UNITS PER ACRE OVERALL IT IS IN
PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP.
SO THE REQUEST IN FRONT OF YOU
IS ANNEXATION, REZONING AND
SITE PLAN.
SO WE WOULD MOVE FORWARD TO
PITTSFIELD TOWNSHIP FOR THEIR
ANNEXATION.
I DON'T WANT TO SAY AUTOMATIC
ANNEXATION BUT IT IS I KNOW
THERE'S A INTERGOVERNMENTAL
AGREEMENT AS FAR AS THAT
PROCESS.
BUT FIRST I HAVE TO COME TO YOU
MAKE SURE THAT IT'S A PROJECT
YOU'RE YOU'RE LOOKING FOR YOUR
COMMUNITY.
SO THAT'S WHERE WE'RE AT TODAY.
WE'RE PROPOSING A ZONING OF OUR
FOUR E WHICH VALHALLA IS ZONED
OUT FOR.
YOU'VE GOT SOME THAT THAT AREA
AS WELL.
BUT AGAIN TO THE MASTER PLAN
DESIGNATION IS FOR TESTING
FAMILY TOWNHOMES WHICH ARE FOR
E ALLOWS AND THE PLAN TYPE YOU
KNOW I HATE THROWING OUT
MISSING MIDDLE YOU GUYS HERE
TOO MUCH BUT IT IS IMPORTANT
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT I THINK
IS A BENEFIT TO THE CITY AS FAR
AS I WOULD NOT CALL THIS
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
I'M NOT GOING TO STAND UP HERE
AND SAY THAT BUT IT'S ALSO HALF
THE COST OF NEW SINGLE FAMILY
DETACHED AND THAT'S IMPORTANT.
YOU KNOW, WE'D CERTAINLY LOVE
TO BUILD DETACHED SINGLE FAMILY
IN THE CITY BUT THIS IS IS
CERTAINLY I THINK SOMETHING
PEOPLE ARE LOOKING FOR WHERE
THEY CAN GET INTO A HOUSE YOU
DON'T IN YOUR BACKYARD BUT YOU
DO GET SOME LIVING SPACE AND
THIS IS A REALLY POPULAR
PROJECT WE'RE BUILDING
SOMETHING YOU MIGHT BE
FAMILIAR.
WE'RE BUILDING SOMETHING
SIMILAR TO THIS IN PITTSFIELD
TOWNSHIP DOWN THE STREET ABOUT
A MILE.
SO IT'D BE SIMILAR TO TO THAT
TYPE OF PROJECT WHICH HAS BEEN
SUCCESSFUL.
JUST A FEW HIGHLIGHTS.
LISTEN TO SITES GREAT FOR
STADIUM PARKING BUT REALLY,
REALLY HASN'T YOU CREATED ANY
VALUE FOR THE CITY?
>> I DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT WAS.
THEY LOSE TIME ALREADY.
>> LET'S GIVE THEM ONE MORE
MINUTE PRETTY QUICK ONE MINUTE.
THANK YOU.
IT'S NOT REALLY CREATING VALUE
FOR THE CITY SO I'M NOT GO
THROUGH ALL OF THESE BUT WE
THINK IT REALLY IS A GOOD
PRODUCTIVE USE OF THE LAND AND
YOU KNOW, LOGICAL BUFFERING
LAND USE TRANSITIONAL ENERGIES
BETWEEN YOUR COMMERCIAL AND
YOUR RESIDENTIAL TO THE WEST.
>> JUST QUICKLY AND I DIDN'T
POINT TO DO ANY OF THIS.
WE ARE PROPOSING AN ALL
ELECTRIC COMMUNITY.
THAT'S SOMETHING AS YOU GO FROM
ROBERTSON IT'S NOT SOMETHING WE
JUST HEY, THIS IS JUST WHAT
WE'RE GOING TO DO BECAUSE IT
SOUNDS WE TOOK A LOT OF TIME TO
THINK ABOUT IT.
WE'VE WORKED WITH RICH AND THE
WOLFPACK.
I THINK WE'VE GIVEN THEM SOME
GOOD INFORMATION.
THEY'VE CERTAINLY GIVEN US GOOD
INFORMATION OVER THE YEARS.
SO WE'VE WORKED A LOT OF THINGS
OUT AND IT'S SOMETHING WE'RE
REALLY PROUD OF .
THIS IS THE PLAN AGAIN, I KIND
OF TALKED ABOUT IT.
YOU'VE SEEN IT THE VILLAGE
OF ANN ARBOR PLANS BUT YOUR
FIRST FLOOR YOU GOT YOUR GARAGE
IN THE COME TO THE REAR, THE
UNIT, THE FLEX ROOM DOWNSTAIRS,
EVERYTHING KIND OF LIVING AREA
ON THE SECOND FLOOR AND THEN
THREE BEDROOMS ON THE THIRD
FLOOR AND ROOFTOP DECK ABOVE
THAT.
I WANT TO BE I'LL BE REALLY
QUICK ON THIS.
WE SPENT A LOT OF TIME WORKING
WITH SOLID WASTE ON THIS.
YOU KNOW, WE'RE WE'RE HAPPY TO
BUILD THIS WITH EXACTLY HOW IT
IS BUT IT HAS A DUMPSTER ON IT
AND WE JUST DO NOT BELIEVE THIS
TYPE OF HOMEBUYER WANTS A
DUMPSTER WITH A WALK HAVE TO
WALK TO THEIR DUMPSTER.
THIS IS A THIS IS A SINGLE
FAMILY.
IT'S A NICE COMMUNITY, NICE
HOME.
THESE ARE FOR SALE UNITS.
THAT IS A MULTI-FAMILY
APARTMENT REQUIREMENT AND WE'RE
BEING LABELED AS A MULTIFAMILY.
IT'S THE FIRST ONE I'VE SEEN IN
ANN ARBOR WHERE THIS HAS BEEN
FORCED UPON.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO US BECAUSE I
THINK IT'S IMPORTANT TO OUR
BUYERS.
IT'S GOING TO BE IMPORTANT WHEN
WE RUN THE WAY THEY'RE GOING TO
BE ASKING WHY DO I HAVE TO TAKE
MY TRASH TO A DUMPSTER?
I THINK THIS IS A PROBLEM AND
WE'VE BEEN TRYING TO CONVEY
THAT I LOVE STAFF.
I DON'T HAVE ANY ISSUE WITH
ANYBODY IN STAFF BUT THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT I FELT WE NEEDED
TO BRING TO YOU BECAUSE WE'RE
NOT WE'RE NOT THRILLED WITH IT.
IT'S IT'S NOT GOOD FOR THE
COMMUNITY.
IT'S NOT GOOD FOR THE
RESIDENTS.
IT'S GOING TO BE LOUD FOR THE
NEIGHBORING PROPERTY WHEN
TRUCKS COME IN THERE MULTIPLE
TIMES A WEEK AND PICK UP THE
TRASH.
SO LISTEN, THIS IS YOUR CITY.
IF THIS IS HOW YOU KNOW YOU
WANT THIS COMMUNITY TO LOOK,
WE'LL BE FINE WITH IT.
WE DO THINK WE WOULD LIKE TO
HAVE A CONDITION OF THE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT SIMILAR
TO WHAT WE HAD A VILLAGE OF ANN
ARBOR WHERE THERE COULD BE
CURBSIDE PICKUP.
>> WE WOULD BE HAPPY TO PAY FOR
IT SEPARATELY AND PRIVATELY
CONTRACT.
I KNOW THAT'S AN ISSUE WITH THE
CITY SO I'M BRINGING IT UP.
I DON'T THINK IT'S NECESSARILY
A PLANNING COMMISSION PURVIEW.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT FOR ME
TO BRING IT UP BECAUSE IT'S
SOMETHING THAT'S REALLY KIND
OF CAUSED US ISSUES ON THIS ON
THE SITE AND WE'VE WORKED WELL
WITH STAFF.
WE'RE WILLING TO BUILD IT THE
WAY IT'S SHOWN WHICH MEETS
THEIR REQUIREMENTS BUT WE THINK
THIS WOULD BE A BETTER WAY TO
DEVELOP A SITE.
>> SO I KIND OF RUSHED THROUGH
THAT.
BUT YOU KNOW, WE'RE HAPPY TO
MOVE FORWARD ON THE SITE.
WE'RE PROUD OF WHAT WE WERE
PRESENTING HERE.
I'D LOVE TO ANSWER ANY
QUESTIONS YOU HAVE AND LISTEN
OF THE NEIGHBORHOOD AS WELL.
>> SO THANK YOU.
PERFECT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
WITH THAT WE WILL GO TO STAFF.
MR. KOWALSKI, THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING, EVERYBODY.
MY OTHER GLASSES.
OK, SO PETITIONER DID A GOOD
JOB SUMMARIZING THE GENERAL
ASPECTS OF THE PROJECT.
I'M JUST GOING TO KIND OF TOUCH
ON A COUPLE OF THE HIGHLIGHTS.
OBVIOUSLY WHAT'S IN FRONT
OF YOU TONIGHT HAS THREE
ACTIONS AS WAS INDICATED
THERE'S AN ANNEXATION AS ONE
MOTION.
>> THERE'S A REZONING AND
OF COURSE A SITE PLAN WITH THE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
>> SO I'M GOING TO TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THE SITE
PLANNING THE REZONING IN THE
ANNEXATION AGAIN, I DON'T THINK
I NEED TO DISCUSS THAT TOO
MUCH.
IT'S OBVIOUSLY WELL WITHIN OUR
ANNEXATION BOUNDARIES AND
UTILITIES AND ALL THAT.
SO OK, SO A COUPLE OF THE
PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS AGAIN I MAY
BE REPEATING SOME OF THE THINGS
BUT I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT
BECAUSE THESE WERE ITEMS AGAIN
THAT WE'D WORKED WITH THE
PETITIONER, THE DEVELOPER WITH
VARIOUS STAFF TO MAKE THE
PROJECT BETTER WE FEEL.
SO AGAIN AS NOTED, THE PROJECT
IS AN ALL ELECTRIC PROJECT SO
THERE WILL BE NO NATURAL GAS
CONNECTION TO THAT.
>> THERE'S ADDITIONAL THERE WAS
A SUSTAINABILITY MEMO AS WELL
THAT WAS ATTACHED TO YOUR
PACKET.
>> THE PETITIONER AGAIN WHICH
THEY DID HIGHLIGHT THE SIDEWALK
THAT WAS AN IMPORTANT FEATURE
FOR STAFF AS WELL AS TO GET
THAT CONNECTION TO AND
OBVIOUSLY IN THERE FOR
THESE
RESIDENTS AS WELL AS ANY
ADJACENT RESIDENTS.
I MEAN IT IT WAS A LITTLE
CHALLENGING TO PUT IT IN THERE
BECAUSE THAT'S NOT A VERY LARGE
PARCEL THAT FRONT'S AN
OBVIOUSLY ENROLLED THERE AND
WITH THE INTENTION BASED ON
HOWEVER THEY DID MAKE IT WORK.
IT IS A FIVE FOOT SIDEWALK THAT
WILL GO OUT DIRECTLY AND THEN
IT JUST JUST EAT OR A LITTLE
BIT NORTH OF WHERE THE SIDEWALK
HITS AND OBVIOUSLY THERE IS A
CROSSWALK THERE SO OK, SO THE
CROSSWALK ADDITIONAL
LANDSCAPING WAS TOUCHED ON THE
WESTERN PROPERTY BOUNDARY, THE
BUFFER THERE THEY HAVE
OF COURSE THERE WAS REQUIRED
MITIGATION TREES FOR LAND, SOME
LANDMARK TREES THAT WILL BE
REMOVED.
IN ADDITION THERE IS ADDITIONAL
LANDSCAPING THAT'S PROVIDED IN
THERE.
WE'VE ASKED FOR ABOUT AS MUCH
AS THAT OUR LANDSCAPE LANDSCAPE
STAFF WOULD ADVISE THAT WOULD
GROW THERE SUCCESSFULLY.
WE CAN'T REALLY PUT TOO MUCH
MORE THERE WITHOUT CROWDING
OTHER ITEMS OUT.
THERE IS A FENCE THAT'S GOING
TO BE PROPOSED AT A LOCATION
ACTUALLY THE PETITIONER HAD
MENTIONED SIX BUT IT DOES SAY
EIGHT FOOT ON THE PLAN.
SO I WOULD ASSUME IT'S GOING TO
BE AN BUT NO PROBLEM.
SO AN EIGHT FOOT PRIVACY THAT
GOES ALONG THAT THE WESTERN
PROPERTY LINE AGAIN AND ALSO
ANOTHER KEY ASPECT OF THIS
PROJECT IS THE THE PARKING BUT
THE MAJORITY OBVIOUSLY THE VAST
MAJORITY OF THIS PARKING IS IN
A STRUCTURE WELL IN A IN
GARAGES ATTACHED THERE IS A
LITTLE BIT OF SURFACE PARKING
BUT IT IS RELATIVELY MINIMAL
AND SO THOSE ARE KIND OF THE
MAIN SITE PLANNED ASPECTS
OF HOWEVER, OBVIOUSLY A BIG
PART OF YOUR DECISION HERE
TONIGHT IS THE ZONING ASPECT
OF IT.
SO THAT'S WHERE STAFF DOES A
LITTLE BIT MORE ANALYSIS.
WE ORIGINALLY WHEN THE PROJECT
WAS PROPOSED YOU KNOW, WE DID
MEET WITH THE PETITIONER ON THE
TYPE OF PROJECT THAT THEY
WANTED TO PROPOSE THE DENSITY
AND AND EVERYTHING AND WE
OBVIOUSLY LIKE WITH ANY PROJECT
WE LOOK THROUGH NUMEROUS ZONING
DISTRICTS TO SEE WHAT WOULD
REALLY WORK THE PROJECT DID
OBVIOUSLY WE DECIDED ON OUR FOR
YOU AND PART OF THE REASONING
BEHIND THAT THE PETITIONER WENT
WITH THAT IS A LARGE, LARGE
AMOUNT TO DO WITH THE THE OPEN
SPACE THAT'S REQUIRED.
>> I'VE NOTED IN THAT MY STAFF
REPORT THE DENSITY IS IS
ACTUALLY LESS THAN AN HOUR TO A
DENSITY THAT THAT THEY'RE
PROPOSING ON THE SITE.
SEVENTY FIVE UNITS OVER SIX
PLUS ACRES OR SO.
SO THE DENSITY IS NOT
NECESSARILY MEAN.
HOWEVER, ALL OF OUR MULTIFAMILY
DISTRICTS HAVE A MINIMUM
OF FIFTY PERCENT OPEN SPACE NOW
THEY'RE REALLY CLOSE AT FORTY
NINE HOWEVER OBVIOUSLY FORTY
NINE IS NOT FIFTY SO SO REALLY
THE R FOR E IS ESSENTIAL IS
REALLY NEEDED JUST FOR THAT
THAT OPEN SPACE QUALIFICATION
AND THEY'RE VERY VERY CLOSE TO
THAT.
>> HOWEVER AS I MENTIONED
THEY'RE NOT SO THE AGAIN THE
AFTER E DOES PERMITTED DENSITY
AS HIGH AS SEVENTY FIVE UNITS
PER ACRE THAT'S CLEARLY NOT
WHERE THEY'RE WHERE THEY'RE
GOING AT THAT IN AN HOUR TO A
FOR COMPARISON SEVENTEEN UNITS
PER ACRE AND THE PROJECT IS
PROPOSING ABOUT TWELVE UNITS
PER ACRE SO THAT GIVES YOU SOME
COMPARISON ON THE AND AGAIN WE
WILL OPEN SPACES OBVIOUSLY VERY
IMPORTANT TO THE PLANNERS AS
WELL AS THE ADJACENT RESIDENCE
AND THE FUTURE RESIDENTS
OF THIS DEVELOPMENT.
THERE IS AGAIN SIGNIFICANT
AMOUNT OF OPEN SPACE THROUGHOUT
THIS THROUGHOUT THE LOCATION AS
WELL AS IT IS ADJACENT TO PARKS
AND A LARGE AREA RIGHT ACROSS
DIRECTLY ACROSS OUR CHURCH.
>> SO WE DO NOT WANT TO MAKE
SURE I COVERED ALL MY IMPORTANT
IMPORTANT POINTS.
SO AGAIN, WE DO FEEL STAFF DOES
FEEL THAT THE ARTERY IS
CONSISTENT WITH THE SINGLE
FAMILY ATTACHED LAND USE
RECOMMENDATION THAT'S IN THE
EXISTING COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE
PLAN.
THAT RECOMMENDATION IS A LITTLE
BIT OLD BUT AGAIN IT IS THE
RELEVANT THAT IS THE APPLICABLE
WHILE UNTIL WE HAVE A NEW
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT IS THE
RECOMMENDATION AND IT WAS
POINTED OUT THAT THE AGAIN IT
CALLS OUT THE SITE SPECIFIC AS
SITE ONE WHICH IS A MIX
OF OFFICE BUT THEN EVENTUALLY
TRANSITIONING TO SINGLE FAMILY
DETACHED WHICH IS WHAT WHAT
STAFF WOULD WOULD CONSIDER THIS
.
>> SO I BELIEVE THAT KIND OF I
BELIEVE THAT SUMMARIZES THE KEY
POINTS THAT I WANTED TO TOUCH
ON.
AGAIN, THERE IS A DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT WITHIN THAT
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
THERE IS THE WE DID ADD THE THE
REQUIREMENT FOR IT TO BE AN ALL
ELECTRIC FACILITY.
SO MR. GOSH, I REALLY MR.
CARTER TO BE HERE TONIGHT BUT
OK SO JUST FOR HIM SO WITH WITH
RESPECT TO OTHER THAN THAT
STAFF IS OBVIOUSLY RECOMMENDING
APPROVAL OF THE ANNEXATION THE
SITE PLAN AS WELL AS THE
REZONING.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
WE MISS YOU MR. GARBER.
AND THANK YOU FOR THE GREAT
SUMMARY THERE.
WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
PUBLIC HEARING.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP THREE
MINUTES ON THE SITE.
UM, WE'LL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PRESENT AND THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY.
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE IF ON
THE PHONE USE THE RAISE HAND
FEATURE AND ZOOM IN FOR FOLLOW
PHONE ACCESS PLEASE CALL 877
EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO FOUR
SEVEN AN ENTRY MEETING EIGHTY
NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE
FOUR ONE TWO TWO SIX CITY STAFF
WILL IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE
LAST THREE DIGITS THE PHONE
NUMBER OR BY NAME IF AVAILABLE
AND YOU'LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT WHEN IT'S YOUR
TURN TO SPEAK PLEASE ENSURE
YOU'RE IN A QUIET AREA
COMMUNITY BACKGROUND NOISES FOR
ALL PARTICIPANTS PLEASE STATE
YOUR NAME AND YOUR ADDRESS AT
THE BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS
AND WE WILL GO WITH THOSE THAT
ARE FIRST PRESENT.
>> WELCOME BACK.
I APOLOGIZE.
I FORGOT MY HEARING AIDS.
I'M MISSING SOME OF THE
INSTRUCTIONS ALL BUT I
APPRECIATE THE FEW MINUTES WE
HAVE OF COURSE I'M NOT GOING TO
REHASH WHAT WE'VE PUT IN PRINT
ALREADY.
I HAVE FILED FOR DIFFERENT
STATEMENTS OF POSITION AS THIS
MATTER EVOLVES.
THINK THINGS CHANGED THE MOST
RECENT WAS YESTERDAY.
THE IMPORTANT DOCUMENTS I
BELIEVE ARE AN
OCTOBER STATEMENT AND
YESTERDAY'S THIS IS NOT THERE
SHOULDN'T BE AS COMPLICATED AS
IT SEEMS.
THIS IS NOT ABOUT DENSITY.
WHAT'S DENSITY IS GOOD ENOUGH.
DO WE LOVE DENSITY?
IS IT IS IT ALL OUR PROBLEM
SOLVED?
THAT'S NOT THE QUESTION HAS
NOTHING TO DO WITH
AFFORDABILITY INITIALLY THERE
WAS CONFUSED BECAUSE THE R FOR
E ACCORDING TO THE UNIFIED
DEVELOPMENT CODE BELONGS IN A
TRANSIT CORRIDOR.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT WAS EVEN
IT TOOK A LONG TIME TO FIGURE
BUT THIS IS NOT A TRANSIT
CORRIDOR.
IT'S NOT EVEN NEAR A TRANSIT
STAFF TOOK THE POSITION THAT
CORRIDOR.
THAT WAS INTENTIONAL OR A
STAFF TOOK THE POSITION THAT
MATTER OF INTENT.
THAT WAS INTENTIONAL OR A
>> IT'S NOT BINDING AND IT MAY
MATTER OF INTENT.
BE THEY MAY BE RIGHT.
>> IT'S NOT BINDING AND IT MAY
>> BUT STAFF SAID SO LONG AS
BE THEY MAY BE RIGHT.
THE PETITIONERS PLAN IS
>> BUT STAFF SAID SO LONG AS
CONSISTENT WITH POLICY AND
THE PETITIONERS PLAN IS
GOALS OF THE CITY AND THAT'S
CONSISTENT WITH POLICY AND
WHY THERE WAS A PROBLEM AS
GOALS OF THE CITY AND THAT'S
RECENTLY AS OCTOBER NOVEMBER
WHY THERE WAS A PROBLEM AS
THE STEERING COMMITTEE FOR THE
RECENTLY AS OCTOBER NOVEMBER
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN UNVEILED AND
THE STEERING COMMITTEE FOR THE
AND DISPLAYED AND DISCUSSED THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN UNVEILED AND
MAP FOR THE CITY GOING FORWARD
AND DISPLAYED AND DISCUSSED THE
.
MAP FOR THE CITY GOING FORWARD
>> OUR AREA THIS ENTIRE AREA
.
THAT WE'RE DISCUSSING IS GOING
>> OUR AREA THIS ENTIRE AREA
TO BE LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL AND
THAT WE'RE DISCUSSING IS GOING
LOW RISE MEANS NO MORE THAN
TO BE LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL AND
THIRTY FIVE FEET ACCORDING TO
LOW RISE MEANS NO MORE THAN
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN NOW SET
THIRTY FIVE FEET ACCORDING TO
AND IT ALSO MEANS CONSISTENT
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN NOW SET
WITH NEIGHBORING BUILDINGS.
AND IT ALSO MEANS CONSISTENT
THIS SITE PLANNED FAILS RIGHT
WITH NEIGHBORING BUILDINGS.
THERE.
THIS SITE PLANNED FAILS RIGHT
>> AIR STRIKE ONE FOR SCHERRER
THERE.
.
>> AIR STRIKE ONE FOR SCHERRER
MORE IMPORTANTLY IN MY MIND,
.
THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
MORE IMPORTANTLY IN MY MIND,
CODE ALSO SAYS AN HOUR FOR EACH
THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
PLAN MUST TAKE INTO
CODE ALSO SAYS AN HOUR FOR EACH
CONSIDERATION MINIMIZING THE
PLAN MUST TAKE INTO
IMPACT ON THE NEIGHBORS.
CONSIDERATION MINIMIZING THE
THIS FAILS MISERABLY.
IMPACT ON THE NEIGHBORS.
THESE BIG TALL BUILDINGS ARE
THIS FAILS MISERABLY.
OUR SITE.
THESE BIG TALL BUILDINGS ARE
TIM MENTIONED MOVING BUILDINGS
OUR SITE.
A LITTLE FURTHER AWAY.
TIM MENTIONED MOVING BUILDINGS
MY OWN PERSONAL CASE.
A LITTLE FURTHER AWAY.
ONE OF THOSE BUILDINGS ENDED UP
MY OWN PERSONAL CASE.
RIGHT BEHIND MY DESK.
ONE OF THOSE BUILDINGS ENDED UP
IT GOT CLOSER NOT FURTHER AWAY.
RIGHT BEHIND MY DESK.
>> BUT THAT'S BESIDE THE POINT
IT GOT CLOSER NOT FURTHER AWAY.
.
>> BUT THAT'S BESIDE THE POINT
>> I BELIEVE ROBERTSON HAS
.
FAILED MISERABLY IN ITS
>> I BELIEVE ROBERTSON HAS
REQUIREMENT TO MINIMIZE IMPACT
FAILED MISERABLY IN ITS
.
REQUIREMENT TO MINIMIZE IMPACT
WE ARE NOT ANTI BUT I HAVE A
.
MINUTE'S THAT'S ACTUALLY THE
WE ARE NOT ANTI BUT I HAVE A
THREE MINUTE TIMER.
MINUTE'S THAT'S ACTUALLY THE
>> BUT I'LL ALLOW 30 MORE
THREE MINUTE TIMER.
SECONDS.
>> BUT I'LL ALLOW 30 MORE
>> THANK YOU.
SECONDS.
YES.
>> THANK YOU.
WE'RE NOT AGAINST ROBERTSON.
YES.
WE'RE NOT AGAINST MY FAMILY.
WE'RE NOT AGAINST ROBERTSON.
WE'RE AGAINST THIS THIS
WE'RE NOT AGAINST MY FAMILY.
UNSIGHTLY OPERATION THAT IS
WE'RE AGAINST THIS THIS
GOING TO INSTRUCT IT'S GOING TO
UNSIGHTLY OPERATION THAT IS
OBSTRUCT LT IT'S GOING TO
GOING TO INSTRUCT IT'S GOING TO
OBSTRUCT ERROR.
OBSTRUCT LT IT'S GOING TO
>> I'VE AGAIN IN OUR PAPERS I
OBSTRUCT ERROR.
HAVE SAID THIS IS A FORM
>> I'VE AGAIN IN OUR PAPERS I
OF TRESPASS THE VERY SORT
HAVE SAID THIS IS A FORM
OF THING THAT THE CITY COUNCIL
OF TRESPASS THE VERY SORT
OUTLAWED WITH HOLIDAY LIGHTS IN
OF THING THAT THE CITY COUNCIL
ANY EVENT, I TOOK ANOTHER LOOK
OUTLAWED WITH HOLIDAY LIGHTS IN
TODAY AT THE WATERS ROAD
ANY EVENT, I TOOK ANOTHER LOOK
PROJECT AND IT'S JUST AS
TODAY AT THE WATERS ROAD
FRIGHTENING AS I THOUGHT IT WAS
PROJECT AND IT'S JUST AS
WHEN I FIRST LOOKED AT IT.
FRIGHTENING AS I THOUGHT IT WAS
THESE BUILDINGS ARE HUGE.
WHEN I FIRST LOOKED AT IT.
>> THEY DO NOT BELONG ON THIS
THESE BUILDINGS ARE HUGE.
SECTION OF CYO CHURCH ROAD.
>> THEY DO NOT BELONG ON THIS
THANK YOU.
SECTION OF CYO CHURCH ROAD.
>> DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE
THANK YOU.
PRESENT THAT WOULD LIKE TO
>> DO WE HAVE ANYONE ELSE
SPEAK AT THIS TIME?
PRESENT THAT WOULD LIKE TO
WELCOME.
SPEAK AT THIS TIME?
I MY NAME IS RICH FINE I GUESS
WELCOME.
TODAY BECAUSE I KNOW CAN I
I MY NAME IS RICH FINE I GUESS
COULD BE KEN ARMALITE SO I
TODAY BECAUSE I KNOW CAN I
THINK PROBABLY A LITTLE KINDER
COULD BE KEN ARMALITE SO I
HERE I'LL I'LL I'LL FOREWARN
THINK PROBABLY A LITTLE KINDER
YOU ABOUT THAT BUT I'M IN ANN
HERE I'LL I'LL I'LL FOREWARN
ARBOR RESIDENT I'M CHAIR OF THE
YOU ABOUT THAT BUT I'M IN ANN
EFFICIENCY AND ELECTRIFICATION
ARBOR RESIDENT I'M CHAIR OF THE
ACTION TEAM FOR THE ANN ARBOR
EFFICIENCY AND ELECTRIFICATION
CHAPTER OF THE CITIZENS CLIMATE
ACTION TEAM FOR THE ANN ARBOR
LOBBY.
CHAPTER OF THE CITIZENS CLIMATE
I'VE SPOKEN IN FRONT OF THIS
LOBBY.
COMMISSION A COUPLE OF TIMES IN
I'VE SPOKEN IN FRONT OF THIS
FRONT OF COUNCIL AS AS WELL AND
COMMISSION A COUPLE OF TIMES IN
PRIMARILY TO OBJECT TO
FRONT OF COUNCIL AS AS WELL AND
DEVELOPERS WHO WERE BUILDING
PRIMARILY TO OBJECT TO
THEIR PROJECTS TO HEAT WITH GAS
DEVELOPERS WHO WERE BUILDING
INSTEAD OF WITH HEAT PUMPS
.
WELL, TODAY THIS EVENING I'M
HERE AND INSTEAD OF TO OBJECT
TO FINALLY SUPPORT SO ROBERTSON
BROTHERS IS PLANNING FOR ALL
OF THE UNITS AT SEVENTY FIVE
SOUTH MAIN TO BE ALL ELECTRIC
USING AIR SOURCE HEAT PUMPS.
WE WANT TO EXPRESS OUR
APPRECIATION TO THEM FOR
EMBRACING ALL AN ALL ELECTRIC
APPROACH THEY ARE JOINING A
GROUP OF OTHER FORWARD THINKING
CLIMATE CONSCIOUS DEVELOPERS
HELPING TO FURTHER ESTABLISH A
TREND EXPRESSING CONFIDENCE AT
FULL ELECTRIFICATION IS NOT
ONLY BETTER FOR THE CLIMATE IT
ALSO MAKES SENSE ECONOMICALLY.
>> ROBERTSON BROTHERS HAS
PROVIDED ME WITH A LIST OF HEAT
PUMP MODELS THAT ARE ON THEIR
SHORT LIST TO BE USED.
I'VE REVIEWED THEM AND THEY ARE
WITHIN THE RANGE OF HIGHER
EFFICIENCY, HIGHER PERFORMANCE
MODELS SO THEY'RE NOT ONLY
AVOIDING BURNING MORE METHANE
THANK GOODNESS, BUT THEY'RE
ALSO HELPING THEIR BUYERS THE
MISSING MIDDLE BUYERS TO SAVE
ON THEIR UTILITY BILLS.
WE WE HOPE THAT ROBERTSON
BROTHERS WILL BE USING THIS TO
PROMOTE THE BENEFITS OF MODERN
EFFICIENT ALL ELECTRIC HOMES
WHEN THEY'RE MARKETING THEIR
PROPERTIES.
BUT WE ALSO ENCOURAGE THEM TO
MAKE FULL ELECTRIFICATION THEIR
STANDARD IN ALL FUTURE
DEVELOPMENTS BOTH IN ANN ARBOR
AND ELSEWHERE.
>> SO THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER SPEAKERS
THAT WOULD LIKE TO PUBLICLY
COMMENT AT THIS TIME SEEING
NONE?
>> DO WE HAVE ANY REMOTE
CALLERS?
MR. LEONARD, WE DO MAKE OUR
AUDIO SYSTEM BLESS US.
ADAM JUST DISCOVERS YOU HAVE
THREE MINUTES TO ADJUST THE
PLANNING COMMISSION.
>> HELLO.
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
YES, GREAT.
HI, THIS IS ADAM MISCAVIGE
CALLING FROM FOURTEEN THIRTY
LAS VEGAS DRIVE IN THE FOURTH
QUARTER.
I LIVE IN THE NEARBY
NEIGHBORHOOD AND ATTENDED THE
INITIAL NEIGHBORHOOD MEETING
FOR THIS DEVELOPMENT A YEAR OR
SO AGO.
AT THAT MEETING BOTH MYSELF AND
COMMISSIONER WISCH NOTED THE
LACK OF A SIDEWALK TO NO SALEEN
ROAD AND I'M GLAD TO SEE THAT
THE COMMISSIONER HAS ADDED A
CENTRAL CONNECTION.
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN A REAL SHAME
TO BUILD SOMETHING HERE WITHOUT
IS IT CONNECTS FUTURE RESIDENTS
TO BUSH'S AND THE OTHER NEARBY
BUSINESSES AT WOODLAND PLAZA AS
WELL AS BUS LINES THAT RUN
ALONG ANN ARBOR.
SALEEN ITSELF MADE WITH THAT
CONNECTION NOW IN THE SITE PLAN
I SUPPORT THIS DEVELOPMENT.
THE SCALE OF THIS PROJECT IS
ENTIRELY APPROPRIATE FOR THE
AREA.
IT ADDS MUCH NEEDED HOUSING IN
AN AREA THAT IS CLOSE TO DAILY
NEEDS JOBS, SCHOOLS AND SEVERAL
BUS ROUTES.
THE VITALITY ADDED TO THE MAIN
SPECIAL CHURCH SUCH ANN ARBOR
SALEEN AREA BETWEEN THIS AND
THE FORTHCOMING ARBOR ON MAIN
DEVELOPMENT CAN ONLY MAKE THIS
SIDE OF TOWN A BETTER PLACE TO
LIVE.
I LOOK FORWARD TO IT.
I DO WANT TO MAKE A MORE
GENERAL POINT THOUGH ABOUT
THIS.
HOW IN THE CITY MAKE IT CLEAR
TO DEVELOPERS THAT IT IS
IMPORTANT TO US IN ANN ARBOR TO
PRIORITIZE WALKABILITY EARLIER
IN THE PROCESS THE SIDEWALK
CONNECTION IS SUCH A CLEAR
ADVANTAGE OF THIS SITE AND I
HOPE WE CAN FIGURE OUT A WAY TO
MAKE IT MORE CLEAR TO
DEVELOPERS THE PEDESTRIAN
ACCESS IS A PRIORITY.
>> THANK YOU.
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER CALLERS?
YES.
CALLER WITH THE PHONE NUMBER
ENDING WITH ONE EIGHT FIVE YOU
CAN PRESS STAR SIX ON MUTE YOUR
HOME.
GO AHEAD CALLER.
HELLO.
>> GO AHEAD.
YES MY NAME IS ERIC IN THE
HOUSE OF TWENTY ONE.
WE HAVE A GOOD TIME AND WE'RE
THANKFUL THAT THERE'S BEEN AND
I HAVE A QUESTION.
THE RECORDS SHOW THAT THE
SECRETARY WHO IS TRYING TO
DEVELOP WILL CONNECT TO AN
EXISTING SANITARY SEWER AT THE
SOUTHWEST CORNER OF PROPERTY
AND FROM THERE AND HOPEFULLY
THE SENATORS WHO WILL FLOW DOWN
PORT HERE AND WHEREVER
LANSDOWNE SUBDIVISION.
SO MY QUESTION IS DURING A
HEAVY RAIN STORM EARLY IN THE
MORNING WHEN THE SANITARY
SYSTEM IS HOW DO WE USE WILL
THESE ADDITIONAL SANITARY
SEWAGE FROM 75 TOWNHOUSES
FLOODING INTO THE BASEMENT IN
THE LOWEST WHITEHALL'S LAND
?
THIS IS NOT LIKE A Q&A PORTION
BUT WE WILL SIR.
DO YOU HAVE ANY OTHER COMMENTS
ASSOCIATED WITH THE CAPACITY
OF THE SANITARY IF NOT, WE WILL
BE CERTAIN TO ASK THAT QUESTION
DURING THE DISCUSSION PORTION.
>> IS THERE ANYTHING ELSE YOU
WOULD LIKE TO ADD IS EASILY
ONTO THE NEXT CALLER?
YES, THANK YOU
EMILY MYALUP.
YOU CAN UNMUTED AND ADDRESS THE
PLANNING PERMISSION FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES AND RIGHT.
>> AND EVERYONE HEAR ME.
YES YES.
AGAIN I SAID I TRULY APPRECIATE
THE TIME AND FOR EACH OF YOU
HAVE DEDICATED TO LISTENING TO
THE CONCERNS OF OUR COMMUNITY.
YOUR SUPPORT MEANS A LOT TO US
AND MAKES A DIFFERENCE AS WE
WORK TOGETHER AS WE STRENGTHEN
OUR COMMUNITY.
THANK YOU FOR BEING ATTENTIVE
AND CARING WHEN YOU LIVE WHERE
YOU LIVE CAN SIGNIFICANTLY
IMPACT YOUR WELL-BEING.
BUT THE REASON GOES BEYOND
CLIMATE AND AND SCENERY FACTORS
LIKE COMMUNITY CONNECTIONS,
ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE,
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AND
ECONOMIC STABILITY ALL PLAY A
CRITICAL ROLE IN SHAPING BOTH
HAPPINESS AND HOW WE SHOULD
HAVE SHOWN LIVING AND
SUPPORTIVE SAFE RESOURCE RICH
ENVIRONMENTS PROMOTES MENTAL
AND PHYSICAL WELL-BEING.
WELL IT IS OF HIGH STRESSORS
AND LIMITED RESOURCES CAN HAVE
OPPOSITE EFFECT UNDERSTANDING
HOW YOU OVER HOW YOUR LOCATION
AFFECTS YOUR OVERALL LOCATION
AND QUALITY OF LIFE GUIDE
DECISIONS WHERE YOU LIVE IN
OPTIMAL HEALTH AND HAPPINESS
AND THAT WAS SOMETHING THAT I
PULLED FROM THE INTERNET.
BUT THE REASON WHY I WANT TO
SAY THAT IS BECAUSE I TRULY I
WANT YOU ALL TO UNDERSTAND THAT
I HAVE LIVED IN MULTIPLE LARGE
CITY AREAS THROUGHOUT MY LIFE
AND I WANT TO ENSURE THAT
ANYBODY NEEDS A PLACE WHERE WE
CAN ALL THRIVE AS SOMEONE IN
HEALTH CARE I I AM DEEPLY
INVESTED IN OUR COMMUNITY AND I
GENUINELY CONCERNED ABOUT THIS
PROPOSAL AND HOW IT ALIGNS WITH
OUR ESTABLISHED CITY POLICIES
AND CURRENT COMMUNITY.
>> I'M NOT SURE IF YOU ALL READ
OUR LETTERS THAT WE HAVE
SUBMITTED IN THE SUBMITTED IN
THE PAST COUPLE OF DAYS BUT I
AM GOING TO BRIEFLY REVIEW WHAT
WE HAVE STATED UNIFIED THE
BARNICOAT CLEARLY DESIGNATES
R.F. FOR ZONING FOR TRANSIT
CORRIDOR SINCE ESPIE TO FOUR
ZERO ZERO SEVEN IS LOCATED
OUTSIDE OF THESE AREAS THE
APPLICATION ARE FOR E ZONING
APPEARS TO BE AN INAPPROPRIATE
FIT FOR THIS PROJECT.
NO TO THE FUTURE LAND USE MAP
ESTABLISHED BY COMPREHENSIVE
LAND STEERING COMMITTEE
EXPLICITLY IDENTIFIES OUR AREA
W.
S NAME UNFALSIFIABLE CHURCH AS
A LOW RISE RESIDENTIAL
COMMUNITY BUILDING AS A MAXIMUM
HEIGHT OF THIRTY FIVE FEET.
THE PROPOSED STRUCTURES ARE
FORTY FEET CONTRADICTIVE
ESTABLISHED GUIDELINES AND
SHOULD BE REVISED TO MEET THE
COMMUNITY STANDARDS IMPACT ON
ADJACENT PROPERTIES.
THIRTY MORE SECONDS MUST
MINIMIZE IMPACT ON ADJACENT
PROPERTIES AND MANDATE THAT THE
UNIFIED COMMAND CODE THE
CURRENT POLICY FAILS TO
ADEQUATELY ADDRESS ESTABLISHED
CONSIDERING THAT WE ARE
REQUIRED TO APPROPRIATE TWO
STOREY BUILDINGS ALONG SHARED
PROPERTY LINES.
MY DAD I NEED MY THREE MINUTES.
I CAN STOP EIGHT MORE SECONDS
AND LASTLY I JUST WANT TO SAY
THAT OH I HAD I HAD SOME NOTES
FROM WHAT YOU ALL TALKED ABOUT
THE ROAD TO COME ON OUT OF OUR
ON OURS WE ARE PRIVATE PROPERTY
SO THAT WAS NOT AN OPTION.
NUMBER TWO, WE HAVE ASKED TO
HAVE TWO STORIES ON THE
ADOPTION SIDES WERE NOT AGAINST
WHAT YOU WHAT THEY'RE
REPRESENTING BUT WE JUST WANT
TO MAKE SURE YOU'RE NOT
IMPACTING OUR LIVELIHOOD AND
OUR WELL-BEING.
NUMBER THREE, THE ELECTRIC BASS
NOT TO BE ON THE ADJACENT LINES
BECAUSE THE IMPACT ARE LIGHT
UP.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> ALL RIGHT.
DO WE HAVE ANY OTHER CALLERS
CALLER WITH THE PHONE NUMBER
ENDING WITH TWO NINE SEVEN YOU
CAN START SIX TO ANSWER YOUR
PHONE AND ADDRESS THE PLANNING
COMMISSION FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES.
GO AHEAD CALLER.
HELLO.
WE CANARIA DANIEL ATKINS I LIVE
IN THE METALS ASSOCIATION
ADJACENT TO THE COUNTRY PLACE
WHICH IS ADJACENT TO THE
PROPOSED PROJECT.
I HAD THREE BRIEF POINTS.
THE FIRST IS THAT THE METALS
ASSOCIATION FULLY SUPPORTS THE
OBJECTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
RAISED BY THE RESIDENTS AND
FEEL THAT THE DENSITY AND
HEIGHT IS AN
APPROPRIATE SECOND
.
WE UNDERSTAND THERE IS A
PRECEDENT AND OTHER ROBERTSON
PROJECTS OR BUILDING LOWER
UNITS AT THE BOUNDARY
OF ADJACENT PROPERTIES AND WE
WOULD ENCOURAGE THE PLANNING
COMMISSION TO REQUIRE ROBERTSON
TO DO THAT IN THIS CASE.
AND THIRDLY, I REMIND THE
PLANNING COMMISSION THAT THE
CITY HAS APPROVED A VERY HIGH
DENSITY PROJECT JUST ACROSS THE
STREET OF THE PROJECT.
I BELIEVE IT HAS A DIFFERENT
NAME NOW THAT PROJECT AS WE
TRIED TO POINT OUT HAS VERY
PROBLEMATIC TRAFFIC PATTERNS
WHICH ARE GOING TO LEAD TO MORE
AND MORE CONGESTED AND THAT
THAT TIME MAIN STREET AND THIS
PROJECT WILL FURTHER AGGRAVATE
THAT SITUATION.
SO WE WOULD ENCOURAGE THE
PLANNING COMMISSION TO REQUIRE
A TRAFFIC STUDY BEFORE FULLY
APPROVING THIS PROJECT.
THANK YOU.
>> OTHER CALLERS SEMAK MOSHIRI
YOU CAN UNMUTED AND ADDRESS THE
PLANNING COMMISSION FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES
CMAC MOSHIRI YOU
CAN UNMUTED AND ZOOME AND
ADDRESS THE PLANNING COMMISSION
.
>> HELLO.
MAYBE WE CAN BUT YOU MIGHT YOUR
PHONE OR YOUR LAPTOP.
>> YES OK SO I'LL I'LL GO
QUICKLY.
I'M PRESIDENT THE AUTOBAHN AS
WELL ACTUALLY TEAM WHO WE SPOKE
FIRST IS ADJACENT TO MY HOUSE
AND I'M HERE WITH MY WIFE TO
RAISE A COUPLE OF POINTS.
MY FIRST POINT IS THE TRAFFIC
IS STATEMENT WHICH IS LISTED IN
THE SECOND ATTACHMENT TO THIS
MEETING AGENDA ITEM NUMBER SIX
IS THE TRAFFIC A STATEMENT THAT
TRAFFIC IS STATEMENT AND I
REVIEWED THOSE NUMBERS AND
MODES OF TRANSPORTATION AND
SEEMS NOT LOGICAL.
SO I WOULD LIKE THE DEVELOPER
TO PROVIDE THE ASSUMPTIONS WHAT
ARE BEHIND THOSE NUMBERS
BECAUSE 278 VEHICLE TRIPS PER
DAY IS ASSUMED AND I LOOK AT
THE AT PEAK HOURS, THE PEAK
HOURS AND THE CONSIDERATION
OF THE ENTRY AND EXIT TO THIS
DEVELOPMENT BEING CITED CHURCH
A CHURCH KNOWINGLY IS A ONE
LANE STREET.
THOSE NUMBERS DOES NOT ADD UP
TO THE AMOUNT OF TRAFFIC GOING
IN AND OUT OF THAT THAT THAT
SITE.
SO FIRST OF ALL, I QUESTION
THOSE NUMBERS AND THEN MY MY
WIFE ALSO HAS A COUPLE
OF POINTS THAT SHE WILL MENTION
HERE.
YEAH, I WOULD I WOULD JUST
THANK YOU EVERYONE.
I WOULD LIKE TO ECHO EVERYONE'S
SENTIMENTS ON ZONING
SPECIFICALLY THE FOR E I THINK
WE CAN ALL AGREE AND THERE'S
MULTIPLE PLATFORMS WHERE THE IS
NOT SUPER HAPPY ABOUT THE
AMOUNT OF CONDOS THAT ARE BEING
DEVELOPED AND I THINK SIMPLY
PUT IT WOULD BE NICE TO HAVE
LESS CONDOS AND MORE LESS THREE
STORY FOUR STORY BUILDING.
I HAVE ALSO LIVED IN MANY AREAS
THROUGHOUT THE UNITED STATES
AND I FEEL LIKE WE'RE BECOMING
A HOUSTON OR SOMETHING LIKE
THAT.
I UNDERSTAND THE DENSITY
CONCERN.
MY OBJECTION IS JUST THE OUR
FREE THANK YOU AND THAT'S ALL
RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANK OTHER CALLERS CALLER WITH
THE PHONE NUMBER ENDING WITH
FOUR ONE SEVEN YOU CAN PRESS
STAR SIX ON YOUR ADDRESS THE
COMMISSION FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES.
>> GO AHEAD.
MY NAME IS DAVID LIGHTMAN AND
CAN YOU HEAR ME?
>> YES YOU CAN.
OK, I'M ALSO AN AUBURN RESIDENT
AND I JUST WANT TO PUT A LITTLE
BIT MORE DETAIL ON THE TRAFFIC
ISSUES THAT FOLKS HAVE BEEN
TALKING ABOUT.
WE THINK IT'S REALLY IMPORTANT
TO UNDERSTAND THAT WE'RE WE'RE
A CYBER CHURCH MEETS MAIN
STREET IS THE MAIN THOROUGHFARE
FROM 94 AND THE SHOPPING AREAS
FOR NOT JUST OUR STREET, NOT
JUST OUR CHURCH BUT THE ENTIRE
NEIGHBORHOOD AROUND THE
STADIUM.
ALL OF THESE HOUSES THAT THEY
GET IN 94 IT'S THE MAIN
THOROUGHFARE DOWNTOWN THE
DOWNTOWN MAIN STREET AREA 94.
AND WHEN YOU COMBINE THE 150
CARS THAT ARE GOING TO BE IN
THIS DEVELOPMENT PROPOSED WITH
THE SOMETHING LIKE A THOUSAND
CARS.
RIGHT.
BECAUSE FOUR HUNDRED AND FIFTY
UNITS AND ABOUT HALF THE RATE
THE AMOUNT OF STRESS THAT
YOU'RE GOING TO BE PUTTING ON
ADDITIONAL STRESS, THE
INTERSECTIONS AT MAIN AND
STADIO AND MAIN AND SO CHURCH
IS ENORMOUS ESPECIALLY AT RUSH
HOUR AT TIMES AND I DON'T THINK
ANY OF THE TRAFFIC STUDIES THAT
HAVE BEEN DONE EITHER FOR OUR
HOUR FOR THIS DEVELOPMENT IS
BOTH OF THOSE DEVELOPMENTS INTO
ACCOUNT IN PARTICULAR BECAUSE
OF VALHALLA AS WE UNDERSTAND
IT, THE ONLY WITH AVENUE
OF EGRESS THAT WE'RE INTERESTED
IN AND OUT OF THAT FOUR HUNDRED
AND FIFTY UNIT DEVELOPMENT IS
GOING TO BE ON MAIN STREET
RIGHT NEAR SIDE OF CHURCH
INTERSECTION AND THOSE FOLKS
ARE ONLY GOING TO BE ABLE TO
LEAVE GOING TOWARDS DOWNTOWN
AWAY FROM NINETY-FOUR.
THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO EITHER
MAKE A U-TURN IN PIONEER HIGH
SCHOOL OR GO AROUND STADIUM TO
SEVENTH STREET ONTO SYRACUSE TO
GET TO 94.
RIGHT.
BECAUSE THEY CAN ONLY GO ONE
DIRECTION AND YOU KNOW, IF YOU
THINK ALL THESE PEOPLE ARE
GOING TO BE TAKING THE BUS,
THAT IS TOTALLY UNREALISTIC.
AND I JUST THINK YOU HAVE TO
REALLY TAKE INTO CONSIDERATION
,YOU KNOW, PEOPLE GETTING IN
AND OUT OF TOWN BECAUSE IT IS
ALREADY BAD IN.
AND THEN THE OTHER POINT I WANT
TO MAKE IS WITH 450 UNITS
COMING TO THAT HOUSE, YOU'RE
NOW GOING TO HAVE 75 UNITS HERE
.
HOW MUCH OF A MARKET IN ANN
ARBOR IS THERE FOR 450 THOUSAND
FIVE HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND
DOLLAR HOUSES?
OK, THAT ARE NOT DON'T HAVE A
YARD THERE'S I DON'T THINK
THERE'S REALLY BEEN A STUDY
SHOWING THAT THERE'S A MARKET
FOR THIS MANY YOU KNOW,
BASICALLY UPPER MIDDLE CLASS
RESIDENTS IN THERE AND YOU KNOW
THAT'S THE THREE MINUTES OR
WHATEVER BUT THEY WANT TO THANK
YOU FOR THAT.
BUT BUT THINK ABOUT ACTUALLY
WORKS AND THEN YOU CAN APPROVE
SOMETHING LIKE THIS NEXT.
>> DO WE HAVE THE CALLERS?
THANK YOU.
>> NO OTHER HANDS ARE RAISED TO
GIVE IT A LITTLE BIT LONGER.
JUST MAKE SURE THAT IT HAS A
CHANCE.
>> OK, LAURA MCGINN YEAH.
UP TO THREE MINUTES TO ADDRESS
.
THANK YOU.
GOOD EVENING EVERYBODY.
I JUST WANTED TO ADD THAT THE
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT IS ALL
ELECTRIC WHICH IS YOU KNOW, A
LOT OF OIL.
HOWEVER, THERE IS NO
OPPORTUNITY THERE FOR SOLAR
POWER BECAUSE OF THESE ROOFTOPS
WHICH MAKE THE FOURTH LEVEL ON
THE BUILDINGS AND IT TOTALLY
FORECLOSES ANY OPPORTUNITY FOR
THE RESIDENTS OF AUDUBON TO
EXPLORE SOLAR OPPORTUNITY WHICH
THE RESIDENTS OF MATTER PLACE
MARROW DRIVE THE MEADOWS HAVE
ALREADY INSTALLED SO WHILE IT'S
ELECTRIC IT'S PUTTING A STRAIN
ON THE GRID WHICH IS A PROBLEM
WITH THE CITY.
AS WE ALL KNOW THE CITY AND IT
IS MORE CLOSED BECAUSE OF THE
HEIGHT OF THE BUILDING IF IT
CLOSES ANY OPPORTUNITY FOR
AUDUBON TO EXPLORE ANY SOLAR
POWER THAT'S THE ONLY COMMENT I
ECHOED THE OTHER SENTIMENT AND
COMMENTS THAT THE AUDUBON AND
THE COUNTRY RAISE THE MATTER.
>> PRESIDENTS HAVE THEIR THANK
YOU.
>> ANY OTHER CALLERS?
>> NO OTHER HANDS RAISED.
OK, ALL RIGHT WITH THAT I'M
GOING TO CLOSE PUBLIC COMMENT.
OK, SO I'M GOING TO READ THE
PROPOSED MOTIONS.
THERE ARE THREE AND PLEASE KEEP
IN MIND AS THIS IS THE
REASONING THIS IS NOT STOP HERE
.
WE ARE JUST RECOMMENDING TO
CITY COUNCIL FOR THREE ITEMS
AGAIN WHICH IS THE ANN ARBOR
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
RECOMMENDS THE MAYOR AND CITY
COUNCIL APPROVE THE TWO FIVE
FIVE THREE ONE FIVE AND THREE
SEVEN ONE CYL CHURCH ROAD
TWENTY ONE EIGHTY AND OBVIOUSLY
THE ROAD SITE PLAN AND
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT THAT'S
MOTION NUMBER ONE MOTION NUMBER
TWO, THE CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION RECOMMENDS THAT THE
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL APPROVE
THE TWO FIVE FIVE THREE ONE
FIVE AND THREE SEVEN ONE SIDE
CHURCH ROAD AND TWENTY ONE
EIGHTY AND OBVIOUSLY IN ROAD
REZONING FROM TOWNSHIP TOWNSHIP
TO OUR FORTY MULTIFAMILY.
THEN FINALLY THE THIRD MOTION
IS THAT THE CITY PLANNING
COMMISSION RECOMMENDS THAT THE
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL APPROVE
THE ANNEXATION OF TWO FIVE FIVE
THREE ONE FIVE THREE SEVEN ONE
SIDE CHURCH ROAD AND TWENTY ONE
EIGHTY ENORMOUSLY ROAD MOVED BY
COMMISSIONER WHITE SECONDED BY
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH.
WE ARE IN
DISCUSSION AND WE'D
LIKE TO KICK US OFF.
>> WE HAVE COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
VERY QUICKLY BRIEFLY I.
I WILL BE SUPPORTING THIS BASIS
FOR MY DECISION IS THAT THEY
ARE FOR ZONING IS CONSISTENT
WITH SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED AND
THESE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT'S WHAT
THESE ARE SINGLE FAMILY
ATTATCHED HOMES.
>> WE'VE HEARD A COUPLE
OF TIMES THAT THERE IS WHAT I
BELIEVE IS A CONFUSION ABOUT
THE DESCRIPTION OF OF OUR FOUR
ZONING.
I'M NOT A LAWYER AND I'M NOT A
PLANNER BUT AS I UNDERSTAND THE
DESCRIPTIONS OF THESE ZONING
DISTRICTS ARE STATEMENTS
OF INTENT IN THE UDC.
>> OH, THEY'RE EIGHT MORE
SECONDS COUNT.
>> THEY ARE NOT RESTRICTIVE.
SO THERE IS NO IMPLICATION THAT
YOU CAN ONLY USE THE R FAWZY R
FOR E ZONING AS DESCRIBED WE
MAKE OUR WE MAKE OUR
DETERMINATIONS ABOUT THIS BASED
ON APPROPRIATENESS WITH CONTEXT
AND AS MR. PLAYED A KAWALSKY
EXPLAINED THE DENSITY THAT IS
PROPOSED FOR THIS PROJECT IS
ACTUALLY LESS THAN WHAT'S
PERMITTED BY SURROUNDING ZONING
IN TERMS OF THE HEIGHT.
>> THREE STORIES NEXT TO SINGLE
YOU KNOW ONE IN TWO STORY
SINGLE FAMILY HOMES.
THIS IS NOT A GIANT JUMP IN AND
TWO MORE POINTS.
ONE IS THAT SOME REFERENCES TO
THE UPCOMING COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN HAVE BEEN MADE AND
PROSPECTIVELY THE THE THE
CONCEPT OF THE LOW RISE
RESIDENTIAL.
THAT'S A DEBATABLE QUESTION.
WHAT THAT IS GOING TO BE IS A
LIMIT THIRTY FIVE IS ONE
POSSIBILITY.
BUT WE ON THIS COMMISSION
ALREADY HAVE HAD A DISCUSSION
OF WHETHER THAT'S WHERE WE WANT
IT TO BE OR NOT.
>> AND SO THAT IS NOT YET KNOWN
AND 35 SHOULD NOT BE TAKEN AS A
DEFINITE NO IT MAY END UP BEING
A RANGE AS WELL AND THE
TRANSPORTATION REVIEW STATES
THAT THE PROJECT IS EXPECTED TO
PRODUCE TWENTY ADDITIONAL TRIPS
ON THE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM IN
THE MORNING AND TWENTY FIVE IN
THE AFTERNOON AT THIS LEVEL
OF TRIP GENERATION DOESN'T
TRIGGER A TRAFFIC STUDY AND WE
DON'T DO THOSE WHEN THEY AREN'T
TRIGGERED.
>> SO THOSE ARE SO MY
CONSIDERATIONS ARE THAT I THINK
THE ZONING IS APPROPRIATE AND
CORRECT AND CONSISTENT WITH THE
SURROUNDINGS AND WITH THE
SURROUNDING ZONING ADJACENT
ZONING AND THAT THIS PROJECT
MEETS SIGNIFICANT CITY GOALS
WHICH HAVE I DO BELIEVE THERE
IS A MARKET FOR HOUSING THAT IS
LESS THAN HALF A MILLION
DOLLARS IN ANN ARBOR BECAUSE
THERE'S REALLY NOT VERY MUCH
OF IT AND THE ALL ELECTRIC
PROJECT IS FANTASTIC AND WE ARE
WORKING WITH A PROVEN DEVELOPER
HERE WHO HAS BROUGHT US
SUSTAINABILITY INNOVATIONS ON
OTHER PROJECTS AS WELL.
AND I'M SORRY I'M NOT SICK.
I'M JUST SLEEP.
>> YEAH, WE GET THANK YOU
COUNCIL MEMBER DESH OTHER
COMMISSIONERS OF CAN I JUST
CLARIFY DID I MISS A MOTION ARE
YOU TAKING THESE MOTIONS ALL
TOGETHER OR ARE YOU JUST
DISCUSSING GENERALLY BEFORE YOU
GET TO FRIENDS?
>> I JUST WANTED TO CHECK I
ACTUALLY READ THE MOTIONS ALL
TOGETHER TODAY MAY MOVE OR
SECOND YET YES OR THOSE I'M
SORRY I MISSED THAT.
>> NO I THINK IT WAS WHITE
MOTION AND THEN COMMISSIONER A
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
MY APOLOGIES.
I'M PRETTY SURE LET THE PLEASE
CORRECT ME IF I'M OK AND THEN
COMMISSIONER WHITE'S RIGHT.
>> SO FIRST OF ALL THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR BRINGING THIS
DEVELOPMENT.
IT'S IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD IT IS
NINE HUNDRED FEET FROM MY
HOUSE.
I WELCOME THE SEVENTY FIVE NEW
NEIGHBORS.
IN FACT MY FIRST QUESTION
WASN'T GOING TO BE ABOUT THE
PARKING.
IT WAS GOING TO BE WHY DIDN'T
YOU PROPOSE MORE THAN SEVENTY
FIVE UNITS IN THIS SIX ACRE
DEVELOPMENT THAT YOUR SECOND
QUESTION WAS PARKING?
WE THINK THIS IS THE RIGHT
PRODUCT.
I HEARD THE QUESTION ABOUT THE
MARKET STUDY.
WE THINK THIS IS THE RIGHT
PRODUCT.
WE HAVE SKINNIER ONES.
COULD WE GET A FEW MORE?
I GUESS I THINK WE JUST FELT
THIS LOCATION REALLY FIT THE
PRODUCT THAT WE ARE PROPOSING
HERE.
SO I HEAR YOU IN FACT WE HAD
LESS BEFORE AND WE GOT AS MANY
AS WE COULD AND I KNOW THAT
DOESN'T SOUND GOOD FOR THE
NEIGHBORHOOD BUT IT IS
SOMETHING THAT THAT WE WERE
CONSCIOUS ABOUT TRYING TO FIT
EVERYTHING ON THERE.
SO IT'S REALLY IT'S A JIGSAW
PUZZLE AND THAT'S THAT'S WHAT
WE WERE ABLE TO GET ON THE SITE
FOLLOWING UP FROM THERE.
I DO WANT TO REALLY THANK YOU
FOR PUTTING IT ON THE SIDEWALK
AND WORKING WITH THE ENGINEERS
AS A PREVIOUS CALLER MENTIONED,
I WAS A PART OF THE COMMUNITY
MEETING AND BEFORE I HAD TO
JUMP OFF TO COME TO THE
PLANNING COMMISSION I ASKED IN
THE CHAT FOR YOU ALL TO
CONSIDER THAT AND IT'S GREAT
THAT IT'S ON THE PLAN.
I DO JUST WANT TO NOTE THAT
THERE WILL BE A GOAT TRAIL FROM
WHERE THE SIDEWALK JUTS UP TO
THE SIDEWALK BECAUSE NO ONE'S
GOING TO GO UP AND THEN TURN
LEFT AND THEN RIGHT.
SO MAYBE IF IT IS CITY OWNED
LAND OR SOMETHING WE CAN MAKE
IT MORE HOUSE MORE HOSPITABLE.
THAT'S TRUE.
I DON'T MEAN TO INTERRUPT YOU.
I THINK THERE'S A LOT OF GRAY
THERE WHICH IS WHY WE DID THAT
WHY YOU'RE SO PROBABLY RIGHT
BUT YEAH I MEAN WE LOOK AT THAT
AND ENGINEERING THE OTHER THING
THAT I WANTED TO ASK YOU ABOUT
AND IT SEEMS LIKE THE AUDUBON
COMMUNITY IS NOT MINABLE TO
THIS BUT I IMAGINE FAMILIES
WILL MOVE IN AND THOSE KIDS
WILL BE ZONED FOR A LOT AND I
DO BELIEVE NOT THE DOWNTOWN
SCHOOL BECAUSE I THINK IT
CROSSES THE STREET IS CORRECT.
I DON'T I SHOULD KNOW THAT I
USUALLY KNOW THAT LATER.
OK, SO I'M SORRY.
>> YEAH.
SO THAT MEANS THEY'RE GOING TO
WALK I KNOW AUDOBON RESIDENTS
ARE ZONED FOR LOT AND SO I
CAN'T IMAGINE THAT THE DISTRICT
WOULD MAKE THAT ADJACENT GROUP
THERE.
SO THAT'S OUR NEIGHBORHOOD
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL AND CURRENTLY
FAMILIES THAT LIVE IN THE
BOROUGH DRIVE COMPLEX THEY GO
THROUGH THE BACKYARDS OF OTHER
NEIGHBORS TO INTO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD BECAUSE IT IS A
LONG WALK AROUND.
SO CHURCH TO GET TO EITHER
CHAUCER OR TO SEVENTH TO GO SO
IF THERE ARE ANY OPPORTUNITIES
TO TALK WITH THOSE BOYS ABOUT
AT LEAST MAKING WALKING PATHS
FOR KIDS AND ESPECIALLY IN THE
EARLY MORNING MAKING THOSE
PATHS LIT BECAUSE THERE ARE
FOXES IN OUR NEIGHBORHOOD AS
WELL AS OUR WILD TURKEYS AND
THE DEER AND SO JUST WHATEVER
WE CAN TO OPEN UP THAT SPACE SO
THAT KIDS COULD MOVE FREELY
THROUGH THE NEIGHBORHOOD,
THEY'RE GOING TO DO IT ANYWAY
UNLESS THERE'S A FENCE THAT
THEY HAVE TO MOUNT AND EVEN
THEN THAT MIGHT BE AN OBSTACLE
THAT THEY TRY TO ADVANCE OVER.
AND THEN FINALLY I THINK IT IS
IMPORTANT THAT YOU CLEAR THE
PARKING BECAUSE WHEN I SAW YOU
AT ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SEVEN
PARKING SPACES AND I REALLY DID
LOSE MY EVERLOVING MINE AND
THEN I REALIZED OH NO, THESE
ARE THE ONES THAT ARE INSIDE
THE GARAGE AND SO JUST NOTING
THAT THERE ARE ONLY SEVENTEEN
SURFACE PARKING WHEN OTHERS SEE
IT I THINK IT WOULD BE GREAT.
SO ALL IN ALL I'M GLAD THAT
YOU'RE BRINGING THIS TO THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
I WELCOME THESE NEW NEIGHBORS.
I'M GRATEFUL THAT THIS SPACE IS
BEING TURNED INTO HOUSING AND I
THINK THE FAMILIES THAT WILL BE
ABLE TO LIVE HERE WILL BE
APPRECIATIVE OF YOUR
DEVELOPMENT.
SO THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
APPRECIATE IT.
I'M GOING TO GO TO I THINK IT
THANK YOU.
WAS COMMISSIONER MILLS AND THEN
I'M GOING TO GO TO I THINK IT
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT BACK
WAS COMMISSIONER MILLS AND THEN
.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT BACK
>> WE'LL GO TO COMMISSIONER
.
HAMMERSCHMIDT AND WE'LL THE
>> WE'LL GO TO COMMISSIONER
COMMISSIONER WEATHERBY, THANK
HAMMERSCHMIDT AND WE'LL THE
YOU.
COMMISSIONER WEATHERBY, THANK
>> THANK YOU.
YOU.
I ECHO A LOT OF WHAT HAS BEEN
>> THANK YOU.
SAID PREVIOUSLY.
I ECHO A LOT OF WHAT HAS BEEN
I HAVE SEVERAL SPECIFIC BUT
SAID PREVIOUSLY.
QUICK QUESTIONS HOW TALL ARE
I HAVE SEVERAL SPECIFIC BUT
THESE BUILDINGS?
QUICK QUESTIONS HOW TALL ARE
OK, THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
THESE BUILDINGS?
SO LET ME MOVE THIS UP HERE AND
OK, THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
IT'S HARD I DIDN'T GIVE A
SO LET ME MOVE THIS UP HERE AND
ELEVATION'S LAY UP TO YOUR PLAN
IT'S HARD I DIDN'T GIVE A
BUT YOU HAVE TO ADD THEM UP.
ELEVATION'S LAY UP TO YOUR PLAN
>> SO I DID IT ELSEWHERE SO
BUT YOU HAVE TO ADD THEM UP.
IT'S TO THE TOP OF THE PARAPET
>> SO I DID IT ELSEWHERE SO
AT THIS POINT.
IT'S TO THE TOP OF THE PARAPET
LET ME GET IT BEFORE I GO ON
AT THIS POINT.
THE RECORD
AND I HAD IT RIGHT
HERE AS A MATTER OF FACT AND I
DON'T IT IS THIRTY I'VE GOT TO
TELL YOU THAT I'M SORRY THESE
THE PHONES ARE WORKING RIGHT
NOW.
>> WHY DIDN'T YOU LOOK THIS UP
DURING REALLY LONG BREAK?
I JUST I THOUGHT I REMEMBERED
IT.
I DON'T WANT TO BE WRONG.
OK, SO TO THE TOP OF THE
HIGHEST PART OF THE PARAPET
HERE WE'VE GOT A THIRTY IT'S
ESSENTIALLY THIRTY SIX AND A
HALF FEET AND IN TO THE
MIDPOINT AND I KNOW IT'S BEEN
BROUGHT UP WITH THE ROOFTOP
THERE'S A KIND OF A SHED AND
IT'S SHOWN ON YOUR ARCHITECTURE
BUT THERE'S SORT OF A SHED
OPENING WHICH BY THE WAY IS ON
THE OPPOSITE SIDE OF THE EDGE
OF THE BUILDING.
SO IT'S NOT WHERE PEOPLE ARE
ADJACENT HOMES ARE THE MIDPOINT
OF THAT IS FORTY.
IT'S ALREADY IT'S UNDER 40
FEET.
IT'S THIRTY NINE.
SO IT'S JUST A FEW MORE FEET
THAN WHAT THE PARAPET IS AND
AGAIN IT'S ON THE INSET
OF WHERE THE UNIT IS AS OPPOSED
TO THE EDGE CORNER EDGE OF THE
BUILDING IS EVER AN OPTION.
>> I WOULD SAY MOST PEOPLE TAKE
THAT YEAH OK
MORE COMMENTS
ABOUT THAT LATER JUST CURIOUS
BUT THERE IS NO I MEAN I GUESS
I'LL JUST SAY THIS AND THEN
I'LL GO TO MY MORE SPECIFIC
QUESTIONS JUST BASED ON SOME
OF THE FEEDBACK WE GOT.
>> I FULLY BELIEVE THAT THIS
PLAN AND I DO HAVE SPECIFIC
QUESTIONS BUT IN MANY WAYS
CREATES A HEALTHY NEIGHBORHOOD.
BUT THAT ONE CALLER WAS READING
LIKE THIS TO ME MEETS A LOT
OF THAT.
I MEAN WE'RE CREATING MORE
HOUSING IN A PLACE THAT HAS
WALKABLE ACCESS TO GROCERY
STORES TO SCHOOLS, TO OTHER
RETAIL YOU'RE BUILDING NEW
CONSTRUCTION THAT CONCEIVABLY
IS NOT GOING TO COST A MILLION
DOLLARS.
HOUSING COSTS PUT UNDUE STRESS
ON PEOPLE TRYING TO AFFORD A
HOME WHICH CREATES HEALTH
ISSUES.
AND THEN I CAN I COULD I ARGUE
THAT THE LACK OF APPETITE FOR
THE CONNECTIVITY TO THE
ADJACENT NEIGHBORHOODS CREATES
THESE LITTLE LIKE ENCLAVES
OF ISLANDS THAT REALLY DON'T
FOSTER BROADER COMMUNITY
ACTIVITIES.
I ALL OF THIS TO SAY I'M VERY
SUPPORTIVE OF THIS PROJECT AND
I THINK THAT YOU'RE DOING A LOT
OF THINGS THAT WE WANT TO BE
SEEING IN ANN HARBOR.
>> I THINK THE SCALE IS
APPROPRIATE.
I MEAN IF YOU'RE THINKING ABOUT
I HEARD A LOT OF LIKE WE ASKED
THEM TO TAKE YOU DOWN TO TWO
STORIES A TWO STORY SIXTEEN
HUNDRED SQUARE FOOT THREE BED
TO BED, THREE BEDROOM, TWO BATH
HOME NEEDS A LARGER FOOTPRINT.
IT WOULD BE LESS OPEN SPACE.
IT WOULD BE FEWER UNITS LIKE I
LIKE WHAT YOU'VE DONE HERE.
>> THERE IS A HUGE APPETITE FOR
THIS SIZE IN THE PRICE POINT
THAT I'M ASSUMING THAT YOU'RE
LOOKING FOR BASED ON THE SIZE
OF OK HERE MY SPECIFIC
QUESTIONS OK, I AGREE WITH A
LOT OF YOUR PRODUCT HIGHLIGHTS.
I WANT A COUPLE
OF CLARIFICATIONS HOUSING
OPTIONS FOR RESIDENTS THAT ARE
UNDERSERVED.
IS THAT IN REFERENCE TO THE
MISSING AT ALL THAT YOU TALKED
ABOUT?
IT IS YEAH.
I MEAN AGAIN WE WOULD NOT HAVE
SPENT AS MUCH TIME AND MONEY ON
THIS IF WE THINK THERE'S NOT A
MARKET FOR THAT.
SO WHEN I TALK ABOUT MISSING
MIDDLE I AM TALKING ABOUT
PEOPLE THAT REALLY CAN'T AFFORD
A SINGLE FAMILY.
>> YEAH, NO I GET IT I I'VE
BEEN USING LIKE ATTAINABLE
HOUSING.
>> YEAH HE SAYS WE OK WALKABLE
I'M INVITING SO I THINK THE THE
WESTERN SIDE OF YOUR SITE
COMPLET BAD AND I TOTALLY
APPRECIATE THIS IS REALLY HARD
TO DO AND IT'S CONCERNING TO
THE FIRE AND THEY MAKE THINGS
HARDER.
I REALLY LIKE FOR EXAMPLE THE
LITTLE LIKE BUILDINGS OR THE
NUMBER IS LIKE SEVEN THROUGH
BASE 13 THROUGH 18 IT LOOKS
LIKE AND IT CREATES LIKE A
LITTLE POCKET THERE AND THEN
FURTHER DOWN THE SITE AS YOU
MOVE IT GETS EAST IT FEELS LIKE
IT'S MORE CUT OFF ESPECIALLY
THOSE ONES LIKE COLUMBIA.
THEY DON'T FACE EACH OTHER.
I'M GOING TO ASK QUESTIONS THAT
I THINK I KNOW THE ANSWER TO
BUT THAT COULD THAT ROAD ARE
THOSE TWO CURB CUTS, THE
EXISTING CURB CUTS?
NO, THEY'RE NOT.
COULD THE ROAD SHIFT EAST AND
YOU HAVE IT BEHIND THE OTHER
TWO SO THAT YOU'RE CREATING
ANOTHER LITTLE LIKE YOU TURN
THE FRONT DOORS THE OTHER WAY.
>> I'M JUST LOOKING FOR LIKE
HOW DO YOU MAKE THIS MORE
OF LIKE A I MEAN DON'T GO AND
REDESIGN YOUR WHOLE SITE BASED
STERILELY I'M LIKE THESE ARE
THE I'M PART OF IT LOOKS
WALKABLE AND BITING AND LIKE
THERE'S THESE LITTLE GREEN
SPACES AND THEN I MOVE OVER
HERE AND I'M KIND OF LIKE OH
YOU'VE GOT THESE LIKE FACING
NOBODY SO IF I CAN EXPLAIN TO
YOU ESSENTIALLY WE THOUGHT
ABOUT DOING THAT SO YOU WOULD
BASICALLY HAVE THE REAR
OF THESE HOMES ALONG THIS ROAD
AND WE JUST FELT THAT WAS NOT A
GOOD LOOK.
SO THAT WAS SORT OF THE IMPETUS
FOR THAT AND THEN WE'D HAVE
ANOTHER ROAD BACK HERE.
SO IT'S ADDITIONAL IMPERVIOUS
SURFACE.
THE OTHER PART OF THIS IS YOU
HAVE TO HAVE A CERTAIN DISTANCE
BEHIND THE UNITS FOR FIRE.
IT'S CALLED THE LAY DOWN
REQUIREMENT.
SO THAT'S WHY THERE'S A THIRD
MORE PAVEMENT HERE.
WE DON'T WANT TO DO THAT.
WE WERE ABLE TO AVOID IT PRETTY
MUCH EVERYWHERE ELSE BUT IT
REALLY FACTORS INTO THE SITE
PLAN DESIGN.
SO THAT'S THOSE THINGS I'M
TALKING ABOUT THE JIGSAW PUZZLE
THAT'S THAT'S A BIG WE START
WITH THAT TO BE HONEST IS THE
LAY DOWN REQUIREMENTS FOR FIRE
SO IT REALLY DICTATES HOW THIS
IS BUILT.
I FULLY SEE IT NOW WHAT YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT I DON'T THINK
THERE'S MUCH WE COULD DO.
WE WOULD MOVE THIS BACK IF WE
COULD WE JUST WE HAVE TO HAVE
THAT SEPARATION FOR FIRE TO
BASICALLY LAY DOWN AND PUT
LADDERS TO GET TO THE TOP
OF THE ROOF AND YOU HAVE NO
OTHER ROOM ON THE EAST.
I TRIED TO BUY THAT PROPERTY.
OH, I'D LOVE TO MAYBE SOMEDAY
AND THEN YOU CAN CREATE MORE
UNITS FACING KNOW ANDREW WHY IS
THERE A GATE AT THE TOP OF THAT
ROAD?
>> SO THAT'S THAT'S A GOOD
QUESTION.
THAT'S AN EMERGENCY VEHICLE
ACCESS GATE.
SO THAT DOES NOT SUFFICE FOR
THE SECOND POINT OF ACCESS,
WE'RE OVER THIRTY UNITS SO WE
NEED A SECOND POINT OF ACCESS
BUT BECAUSE OF THE DISTANCE
FROM THAT THERE'S NOT ENOUGH I
DON'T HAVE ENOUGH WIDTH TO HAVE
TWO ENTRANCES AND I HAVE
NOWHERE ELSE TO CONNECT.
SO THAT DOES NOT MEET OUR
SECOND ACCESS BUT IT DOES MEET
THE REQUIREMENT FOR HAVING AN
EXTRA LONG ROAD DRIVE HERE.
SO IF I DIDN'T HAVE THAT HERE
THIS WOULD BE TOO LONG OF A
DRIVE.
SO IT'S WE'D LOVE THAT TO COUNT
AS A SECOND THE EMERGENCY
ACCESS BUT WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO FIRE SUPPRESS THESE BECAUSE
OF THAT WHICH IS AN EXTRA
TWENTY THOUSAND A UNIT OR SO.
BUT WE STILL DO NEED IT BECAUSE
OF THE OVERLAIN DRIVEWAY.
>> SO I KNOW THAT'S A LONG
EXPLANATION BUT IT'S ANOTHER
FIRE REQUIREMENT SO THAT IS NOT
HOW THESE PEOPLE WILL ACCESS
THEIR BE.
>> YES.
YEAH, I PROMISED PROMISE I WAS
A GOOD QUESTION.
HOW DO YOU KEEP UP TO THE ROOF
BECAUSE I DIDN'T SEE STAIRS UP.
>> IT'S A DIFFERENT THERE'S A
THERE'S A YES THERE'S ANOTHER
LAYOUT AND IT ESSENTIALLY WRAPS
THIS WRAPS AROUND IN A U OK SO
YOU LOSE A LITTLE BIT OF CLOSET
HERE BUT YEAH IT WORKS FOR SURE
I AM GOING TO AGREE WITH THE
LAST CALLER THAT I WISH THAT
THERE WAS SOLAR INSTEAD OF A
ROOF DECK.
>> I'LL JUST SAY THAT I FEEL
LIKE THAT IS A MISSED
OPPORTUNITY.
>> THAT'S MY BIGGEST NEGATIVE
COMMENT.
OTHERS MAKE THE CONNECTION THE
CONNECTION I SAW THAT WHERE THE
CONNECTION TO AUDOBON WOULD
HAVE BEEN AT THE BOTTOM, YOU
KNOW, WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT A
SIDEWALK PATH BECAUSE I MEAN TO
STEP OUT AND THERE YOU GO TRAIL
THERE TOO.
>> YEAH, I SAW A I GUESS A
COUPLE OF THINGS ON THAT LET'S
TALK ABOUT ACTUALLY GOOD.
COME ON.
I DON'T IF THEY WANT THAT THEY
PROBABLY DON'T AND I DON'T
THINK THEY HAVE SIDEWALKS IF I
CAN'T I CAN'T RUN BUT I DON'T
THINK THEY DO.
THERE'S A LOT OF GREAT SO I
DON'T KNOW IF I CAN MEET ADA TO
BEGIN WITH AND THEN IT'S GOING
IN WHICH WAS SORT OF MY RANT
BEFORE RIGHT INTO THE BACK OF A
SOLID WASTE ENCLOSURE WHICH BY
THE WAY WOULD BE GREAT OPEN
SPACE OR MAYBE A COUPLE
OF PARKING SPACES IF WE COULD
GET A MORE BUT IT WOULD
BASICALLY RUN RIGHT INTO THAT
SO SO THAT WAS MY NEXT POINT I
THINK NO IT'S NOT BUT I'M GOING
TO MOVE THERE.
SO ARE YOU GOING IS THIS JUST
AN ISSUE FOR TRASH OR THIS LIKE
A TRASH AND RECYCLING ISSUE?
>> BOTH SO I I'M ON THE
DEVELOPMENT TEAM FOR BRITTIAN
LIKE PLANET WE WE HAVE SMALLER
CARTS THE CITY PICKS UP LIKE
TWO YARD DUMPSTERS AND ALL
OF THAT WAS DISCUSSED.
I DON'T KNOW IF THIS IS
SOMETHING FROM LIKE SEVEN YEARS
AGO THAT WAS NEGOTIATED THAT
WAY BEFORE MY TIME.
BUT LIKE WE HAVE DIFFERENT WE
DON'T HAVE ONE DUMPSTER.
WE HAVE SMALLER CARTS.
I MEAN THERE'S NOT TINY THERE'S
THEY'RE DISTRIBUTED THROUGHOUT
THE SITE.
I'M REALLY BITING HIS LIP ON
THIS ONE.
>> I I SULD JUMP IN ON HERE.
>> SO THE SOLID WASTE DENIED
ANY THEY WILL NOT APPROVE A
PLAN WITH INDIVIDUAL CARTS HERE
THEY ARE INDIVIDUAL THEY'RE
SHARED.
NO THERE'S NO THIS IS THE ONLY
PLAN THAT WOULD BE APPROVABLE
BY SOLID WASTE IS THE DUMPSTER
BELIEVE ME THE DEVELOPER WENT
BACK AND FORTH WITHOUT A SOLID
WASTE.
NOW THERE HAS BEEN OTHER
PROJECTS THAT HAVE DONE IT IN
OTHER WAYS AND INCLUDING ONE
FROM THE DEVELOPER HIMSELF THAT
IN THE VILLAGES THAT HAS NOT
BEEN BUILT YET WAS APPROVED
WITH THE CAVEAT OF IF THE
DUMPSTER DON'T WORK YOU GO BACK
IN THERE AND DO THE CARTS KIND
OF I THINK IT IS THE WAY TO
REVERSE THE CARTS DON'T WORK.
THEY GO IN THERE AND DO THE
DUMPSTERS ARE SOLID WASTE.
WE HAD EXTENSIVE DISCUSSIONS
INVOLVING OUR SOLID WASTE STAFF
ALL THE WAY UP TO THE VERY TOP
END INCLUDING LEGAL
REPRESENTATION BECAUSE THIS WAS
GOING BACK AND FORTH OUR SOLID
WASTE POLICIES AND CODES AND
GUIDELINES DO NOT SUPPORT
INDIVIDUAL CARS FOR DEVELOPMENT
OF THIS SIZE.
THEY WILL NOT RECOMMEND
APPROVAL FOR THAT.
THEY HAVE HAD ISSUES WHILE IT'S
BEEN DONE ON PROJECTS IN THE
PAST.
OUR SOLID WASTE IS TELLING US
THEY'VE HAD NUMEROUS ISSUES
WITH THIS.
IT THEY DON'T THEY WOULD ALSO
THERE'S ISSUES WITH BACKING UP
AS YOU CAN SEE FROM THOSE THEY
WERE DATASTREAM THE ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY INDIVIDUAL CARS
LINING THE ROAD.
THEY'VE LOOKED THROUGH ALL THE
OPTIONS.
WE HAD A PLAN THAT SHOWED THAT
THEY HAD A PLAN.
>> THEY ORIGINALLY TRIED TO GO
FORWARD WITH THAT PLAN TO TO
PROVIDE EXACTLY SIMILAR WHAT
YOU'RE SAYING ALL DIFFERENT
KINDS OF OPTIONS.
HOWEVER, THIS IS THE ONLY PLAN
THAT I WAS ALWAYS LOOKING AT
BOTH THE FRANCHISE CAR AS WELL
AS WHAT SOLID WASTE STAFF HAS
AND USING EXPERIENCE IN THE
PAST THEY'RE LOOKING AT OUR
CODES AND GUIDELINES AND SAYING
THIS REQUIRES DUMPSTER'S.
SO I WOULD SAY LIKE THIS THERE
ARE CODES, POLICIES, GUIDELINES
ARE REQUIRING DUMPSTERS AND
TRASH.
THAT'S HOW WE DO IT ANYWAY.
THAT'S KIND OF SO IT'S
INTERESTING WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
TO TOUCH ON THAT ONE ANYWAY
BECAUSE I FEEL THERE IS A PATH
FOR AS I MENTIONED WITH THE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT WHICH
AGAIN I DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S
YOUR PURVIEW BUT I THINK IT'S
SOMETHING YOU PUT ON THE RECORD
IF YOU'RE SUPPORTIVE OF THAT, I
WOULD HAVE TO JUMP IN BECAUSE
YES, YOU PROBABLY IN THEORY
COULD HOWEVER SAY THAT I WAS
TELLING YOU SOLID WASTE STAFF
IS ABSOLUTELY NOT GOING TO
RECOMMEND AGAIN THEY THEY'RE
GOING TO DIRECTLY AGAINST THAT.
SO YES.
>> OK, WELL COMMISSIONER REALLY
QUICKLY BECAUSE IT'S ON THAT
AND THEN WE'LL GET THE
COMMISSIONER WELL SO WHAT'S THE
AREA OH WHAT'S THE AREA TO THE
LADY HAVING A PRIVATE PICK UP?
WHY WHY DO WE AS THE CITY
PROHIBIT THEM FROM DOING THE
CITY?
>> I DON'T KNOW.
IT HAS ADDITIONAL COMBAT .
I KNOW ENOUGH TO SAY THE CITY
HAS A CONTRACT SO YOU CAN GO TO
INDIVIDUAL BECAUSE OTHERWISE
YOU CAN HAVE INDIVIDUAL
DEVELOPMENT CONTRACTING OUT
SIDEWAYS HERE.
THERE'S A LOT OF COMMUNITIES
OF FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS SO YOU
DON'T END UP WITH NUMEROUS
VENDORS TEARING ROADS WITH
NUMEROUS TRUCKS DOWN THE SAME
AREA SO COMMUNITIES DO MAKE
THOSE SORT OF JUDGMENTS.
BUT IN SHORT, IF YOU WANTED
MORE INFORMATION THAT WE I
WOULD INVITE THE SOLID WASTE
TEAM TO COME AND TALK TO YOU
ABOUT SOME
OF THOSE
REQUIREMENTS AT THIS POINT
DESPITE YOU OUR DESIRE WE HAVE
I APPRECIATE THE PETITIONER
WORKED TO DELIVER A STIPEND TO
YOU IN TURN WE ARE BRINGING TO
YOU THAT OUR STAFF WHO HAVE
REVIEWED OUR CODE REQUIREMENTS
HAVE SAID WE CAN SERVICE THIS
AND THEY HAVE NOT PRIOR TO THIS
VERSION BEEN ABLE TO FIND A
LAND BAKER THEY COULD COMMIT TO
SERVICING TRASH AND RECYCLING
FROM.
>> THANK YOU.
I JUST HAVE TWO MORE QUICK
THINGS IF EVER THIS TRASH GETS
SOLVED AND THAT DOES NOT BECOME
DUMPSTERS, I MEAN I WOULD JUST
I WOULD ENCOURAGE I GUESS THE
NEIGHBORING VILLAGES AND
COMMUNITIES.
THIS IS A GOOD CONNECT.
YOU'RE PUTTING THE SIDEWALK IN
ANN ARBOR.
SELINE LIKE I DON'T SEE A WAY
FOR THEM TO APPEAR LIKE
NEIGHBORING COMMUNITIES TO
ACCESS THAT LIKE WITH A LEGAL
TYPE PATH OTHER THAN JUST KIND
OF LIKE CUTTING THROUGH YARDS
LIKE I THINK THAT WOULD BE A
HUGE BENEFIT FOR OTHER PEOPLE
AND THEN THIS IS JUST SORT OF A
GENERAL LIKE WITH ALL THIS
DEVELOPMENT AND MAYBE THIS IS
SOMETHING FOR NEXT YEAR MAYBE
IT'D BE GREAT FOR A CROSSWALK
SAY A CHURCH SO THAT PEOPLE IN
THESE AND NEIGHBORING
DEVELOPMENTS COULD CROSS IT
SAFELY.
OH SO I CHURCH I'M SORRY.
YES I YEP.
YEAH EXACTLY.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT.
COMMISSIONER WEATHERBEE.
OK SO A COUPLE THINGS SO NO ONE
75 S MAIN IT'S NOT IT'S NOT
SEVENTY FIVE S MAIN AND AS
SOMEONE WHO LIVES ON S MAIN
YOU'LL END UP WITH A LOT
OF PEOPLE AT THE PNC BANK
DOWNTOWN AND PRESUMABLY YOU'RE
PLAYING OFF OF THE TOIVO ON S
MAIN BECAUSE IT IS NOT ON S
MAIN AND 75 IS NOT THE NUMBER.
>> THE EXPLANATION
AND I CAN'T
SEE THAT FIRE OR EMERGENCY
SERVICES ARE GOING TO BE OK.
YEAH, I'M NOT I'M NOT IN
MARKETING.
I UNDERSTAND THE CONCERN
ACTUALLY THE SAME CONCERN
OBVIOUSLY THERE.
SEVENTY FIVE UNITS THAT'S THE
SEVENTY FIVE AND THEN S MAIN
CROSSOVER NORTH YEAH IT'S
NEARBY YOU KNOW THAT'S NOT IT
COULD BE SAID WE HAVEN'T
PLANTED BROCHURES ON THIS YET
SO YOU KNOW IF THAT'S THE
STICKING POINT BUT BUT YEAH I
MEAN THAT'S THE NAME THAT I
THINK WE LIKE FOR IT JUST
BECAUSE IT IS YES IT'S CLOSE TO
MAIN STREET IT'S GOT SEVENTY
FIVE UNITS.
THAT IS HOW OUR MARKETING TEAM
CAME UP WITH IT.
THAT'S OK.
THAT'S THAT'S THE EXPLANATION.
I JUST HONESTLY I THINK
SOMEBODY IS GOING TO DIE
BECAUSE LIKE HONESTLY THIS IS A
IT'S A SAFETY THING.
I KNOW THAT FIRE DON'T THAT
THEY DON'T LIKE IF SOMEBODY
CALLS EMERGENCY AND SAYS
THEY'RE SEVENTY FIVE S MAIN YOU
ABSOLUTELY WILL NOT GET PEOPLE
TO THIS DEVELOPMENT AND I THINK
IT'S A REALLY IMPORTANT ISSUE.
LET ME BRING IT TO OUR TEAM.
I UNDERSTAND JUST YOU CAN SAY
STADIUM VIEW IF YOU WANT TO
BRING IN THE SOUTH MAIN THING
IT'S HALLWAY'S STADIUM BUT
NONETHELESS BUT LIKE 75 S IS
JUST WRONG AND AND IT'S A
LITTLE BIT OF A JOKE BUT IT'S
ALSO REALLY SCARY.
I UNDERSTAND BECAUSE IF
SOMEBODY CALLS ABOUT THAT AND
IF THERE'S SOMEBODY WHO'S NEW
TO THE AREA AND DOESN'T KNOW
THE ROAD AND JUST IT'S JUST
WRONG THERE IS A 75 AND IT'S
NOT IT'S NOT EVEN CLOSE.
SO I UNDERSTAND THAT IS
SOMETHING THAT I FEEL VERY
STRONGLY ABOUT.
>> OK, SO THE NEXT THING IS I
APPRECIATE THAT PEOPLE DON'T
WANT CONNECTIVITY.
THIS IS YOUR ISSUE THEN THE
CITY ISSUE THIS WHOLE AREA IS A
MESS OF UNCONNECTED PIECES.
IT IS AND IT'S CAUSING PROBLEMS
FOR FIRE.
IT CAUSES PROBLEMS FOR SOLID
WASTE AND I THINK WE'RE FILLING
UP THIS CHUNK BUT I THINK WE
SEE WHY WE DON'T WANT TO DO
UNCONNECTED AREAS IN THE
FUTURE.
SO THAT'S AGAIN IT'S NOT REALLY
YOUR ISSUE BUT IT'S PROBLEMATIC
.
>> THE SIDEWALKS HERE, LOVELY
SIDEWALKS THEY DON'T CONNECT TO
ANYTHING.
SO LIKE IF YOU I MAYBE IF
YOU'RE COMING DOWN THE CENTER
AISLE THEN YOU COULD GET TO AN
ISOLATED ROAD BUT LIKE BEHIND
NUMBER SEVENTY FIVE THE
SIDEWALK AND 334 OF THE
SIDEWALK OF THE SIDEWALK GO
THROUGH BEHIND 34 BUT IT
DOESN'T GO THROUGH 303.
SO IT'S JUST I REALLY
APPRECIATE THAT YOU HAVE THE
SIDEWALK TO UNIVERSALIZING BUT
INTERNAL SIDEWALKS DON'T ALL
CONNECT TO THAT SIDEWALK SO
THAT'S JUST A FACT TO THINK I
CAN LOOK AT THAT THESE ARE LESS
SIDEWALKS THAN THEY ARE FRONT
ENTRANCES OR REAR END.
YEAH, THEY'RE NOT REALLY
SIDEWALKS.
THEY'RE JUST PAST THE DOORS
COME SO THERE'S THAT AND THEN
GARBAGE COLLECTION I THINK
THAT'S JUST GOING TO BE A
PROBLEM BECAUSE THERE IS NO
CONNECTIVITY.
SO YOU'RE GOING TO EITHER HAVE
GARBAGE TRUCKS BACKING UP.
I MEAN IT'S GOING TO BE A
MASSIVE BEEPING AND CRASHING
AND I GUESS THAT'S THAT'S WHAT
IT IS SEWAGE ISSUES.
SOMEBODY BROUGHT UP THE SEWAGE
ISSUES AND I THINK THERE'S
MAYBE SOMEONE FROM THE CITY
I'LL TALK ABOUT I MEAN I CAN
ADDRESS IT IN A GENERAL SENSE
JUST LIKE ALL PROJECTS OUT
OF YOU THAT COME BEFORE YOU AND
COUNCIL ULTIMATELY THEY DO
PROVIDE SANITARY SEWER
CALCULATION'S THOSE THEIR MODEL
WE HAVE A SANITARY SEWER
MODELING SYSTEM TO MAKE SURE
THAT THERE'S NO UNDUE NO
DOWNSTREAM IMPACTS AS MANY
OF YOU MAY BE AWARE, THIS AREA
WAS PLAGUED WITH FLOODING FOR A
WHILE.
THAT HAS FOR THE MOST PART BEEN
REMEDIATED BY A COUPLE OF ONE
WAS A DEVELOPMENT PROJECT THAT
YOU GUYS SAW MANY YEARS AGO
WHICH ACTUALLY WASN'T BUILT BUT
THEY DID BUILD A DETENTION
BASIN.
SO THAT HAS ADDRESSED SOME
OF THE FLOODING SCENARIOS IN
THAT AREA.
SO I'M NOT NOT THE FLOODING
EXPERT HERE BUT I I'VE HEARD
THOSE THAT HAVE ADDRESSED THAT
SITUATION AND AGAIN THEY'VE
MODELED THEIR SANITARY IMPACTS
IN THE CITY DOES FEEL THAT IT'S
WE HAVE SUFFICIENT CAPACITY AND
THEY HAD TO THAT.
>> SO YEAH, I MEAN OBVIOUSLY
ADDING THAT POND THERE'S
NOTHING THERE NOW TO CAPTURE
IT.
SO THAT JUST IS GOING TO MAKE
IT BETTER JUST BECAUSE OF THE
STORM.
BUT ALSO THERE'S NOT A COMBINED
SYSTEM HERE SO STORM WATER IS
NOT GOING TO GET INTO THE SEWER
SYSTEM.
SO SOME AREAS THERE IS COMBINE
THAT LIKE ROYAL OAK YOU HAVE
SOME MAJOR ISSUES THAT'S NOT
THE CASE HERE.
YEAH, AND SO THAT'S GREAT AND I
THINK FOR THAT BECAUSE ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT IT'S A NEW
DEVELOPMENT ACTUALLY MAKES OUR
WATER ISSUES BETTER AND FOR
MOST OF SO THAT'S HOPEFULLY
PEOPLE CAN TAKE SOME
COMFORT FROM THAT AND I THINK
THAT'S ALL I HAD TO SAY.
I DO LIKE THE PROJECT.
THANK YOU.
I THINK IT'S A GOOD PROJECT AND
A GOOD SPOT AND I DO THINK
THOSE ARE GREAT.
WE DON'T HAVE THAT MANY
OF THEM.
OK, THANK YOU.
I APPRECIATE IT.
>> UNDERSTOOD.
MR. MILLS.
>> I ALSO REALLY LIKE THE
PROJECTS.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I HAVE
BEEN PAYING A LOT OF ATTENTION
TO IS WHEN PEOPLE SAY WE'RE
GOING TO DO ALL ELECTRIC MAKING
SURE BUT IT'S SOMEWHERE SO IT'S
NOT JUST TALKED AND IT'S IN THE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
>> I REALLY LOVE THAT.
THANK YOU.
WOLFPACK WOULD NOT LET US GET
AWAY WITH IT.
I IT IS THEN THERE'S TRUTH IN
ADVERTISING.
>> I THINK THAT'S AWESOME EV
CHARGERS I'M CURIOUS ABOUT THAT
BECAUSE IT'S NOT REQUIRED BY
CODE .
>> I'M NOT IS IT LIKE IS IT
SHOWN IN THIS LIGHT BECAUSE
THEY'RE SIGNIFICANTLY EXCEEDING
THE CHARGER THE INSTALLED OK
YES THEY HAVE IT BOTH IN THE
COMPARISON CHART AND IT'S SHOWN
ON THE SITE PLAN OF THE PARKING
AS WELL SO SUPER I COULDN'T SEE
IT IN THE CONTROL.
>> NOTHING IN THE IN THE
GIGANTIC PDF DIDN'T LIKE IT BUT
YOU'RE RIGHT THEY ARE EXCEEDING
THE REQUIREMENT FOR THE
CHARGERS.
>> YEAH.
AND WITHIN ZONING IT FITS
ABSOLUTELY LIKE I REALLY LIKE
THIS PLAN IF WE IF WE TEAR
THESE THINGS APART, IF THE
EMOTIONS PART I'M ALL FOR THE
SITE PLAN I THINK IT'S AWESOME
MY QUESTION OR CONCERN IS
REALLY ABOUT THE ZONING
CLASSIFICATION.
I THINK THIS PROJECT FITS THIS
IS IN MY MIND THIS IS A PLACE
WHERE WE DON'T HAVE A GOOD
ZONING DESIGNATION THAT ALLOWS
FOR THIS KIND OF THING.
>> I AGREE WITH THAT.
RIGHT.
IT'S IT'S AN OVERKILL.
THE R FOR E IS AN OVERKILL FOR
WHAT YOU ACTUALLY HAVE AND
THAT'S THAT'S MY CONCERN
BECAUSE ACTUALLY AGAIN I DON'T
CARE ABOUT THE DENSITY SO MUCH
I WOULD WELCOME MORE LIKE
THAT'S NOT WHAT I WANT TO CAP I
THINK ON AN UNLIMITED HEIGHT
HERE IS NOT SOMETHING THE LONG
TERM ANYBODY WOULD REALLY,
REALLY BE COMFORTABLE WITH AND
SO WELL I DON'T KNOW THAT
UNLIMITED HEIGHT WOULD BE THAT
MANY PEOPLE BE COMFORTABLE.
I THINK THAT IF THIS WERE IF
THIS WERE ONE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY STORIES ON THAT SITE,
WOULD YOU IF WE REZONE IT AS IT
IS THERE'S NOTHING STOPPING
THAT YOU STILL NEED TO APPROVE
THE SITE PLAN.
THERE'S STILL THOSE HAVE TO GO
THROUGH THAT PROCESS BUT BY
THAT TIME IT'S BY RIGHT THE THE
REZONING AND WE HAD THAT SAME
THOSE SAME CONVERSATIONS THERE
NOTHING THAT REALLY FITS INTO
THE BOX AND THE PUDI JUST
SEEMED LIKE AN OVERKILL AS
WELL.
>> SO THAI'S WHICH IS WHY I'M
CURIOUS.
SO I WENT THROUGH I WAS LIKE
WHAT IS THE PRECEDENT FOR THIS?
RIGHT.
AND VALHALLA IS THE SAME WAY
AND THERE WERE CONDITIONS ON
VALHALLA AND SO AND I THINK THE
ONLY THING THAT GIVES ME PAUSE
HERE IS IS IS THAT PART OF IT
THAT THAT YOU'RE 40 FEET I MEAN
ACTUALLY THAT'S LIKE THE KIND
OF STAFF PLANT THAT FIFTY FEET
AND I WAS LIKE TOTALLY
REASONABLE.
RIGHT LIKE AWESOME GREAT.
>> LIKE EVEN IF YOU WANTED TO
GIVE YOURSELF A CUSHION I THINK
THAT THAT'S THAT GIVES ME A
LITTLE BIT MORE ASSURANCE
BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW THAT I'M
EXCITED THAT IN THE COMING
YEARS WHEN WE HAVE A NEW
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN THAT IF WHAT
THAT SHOWS IS LOW OR MEDIUM
RISE RESIDENTIAL LIKE THIS, I
THINK THAT THIS IS NOT
GOING TO
BE OUT OF LINE IF SOMETHING
HAPPENS LIKE WHO KNOWS?
RIGHT.
AND ONCE IT'S RESOLVED AND SO
THAT'S I'LL BE JUST STRAIGHT UP
WITH YOU.
THAT'S WHAT'S GIVING ME PAUSE
ON THE REASONING PORTION OF IT.
I LOVE THIS PLAN.
I WILL I WILL VOTE FOR THE SITE
PLAN BUT I LIKE AS IS THAT'S
GIVING ME A LOT OF PAUSE
BECAUSE I THINK WE DON'T TIE
AND THERE'S A REASON THAT WE
DON'T TIE THIS PLAN TO THE THE
ZONING BUT BUT YOU'RE VERY MUCH
UNDER BUILDING WITHIN THE
ZONING AND I THINK THAT THERE'S
LOTS OF THINGS THAT COULD COME
UNDER THE ZONING THAT WOULD
CERTAINLY GIVE ME PAUSE AND
MAYBE MORE OF YOUR NEIGHBORS
PAUSE.
>> YEAH.
SO THAT YEAH.
THANK YOU COMMISSIONER.
I LIKE THIS PLAN.
I HAVE REALLY SOME SERIOUS
TROUBLE WITH REZONING IT IN A
WAY THAT WOULD CREATE BY RIGHT
THE ABILITY TO BUILD AN
UNLIMITED BUILDING THE MICHIGAN
ZONING ENABLING AND THE POWERS
CONDITIONAL ZONING BUT WE CAN'T
OFFER CONDITIONS ONLY THE
DEVELOPER CAN OFFER CONDITIONS
SO WE CAN'T SIT HERE AND SAY IF
YOU PUT THIS CONDITION ON IT
WILL APPROVE US.
BUT I I WE WE HAVE SERIOUS
RESERVATIONS ABOUT APPROVING
THIS ZONING DISTRICT GIVEN THAT
YOU COULD DECIDE TOMORROW, YOU
KNOW WHAT THE MARKET REALLY
WOULD SUPPORT A 50 STOREY
BUILDING AND THERE'S NOTHING
THAT WOULD PREVENT IT BECAUSE
WE'RE GOING TO DO WHAT WE HAVE
TO BE ABLE TO DO THAT RIGHT.
>> I'M NOT SUGGESTING THAT YOU
WOULD DO THAT BUT THAT'S THE
WAY THE LAW WOULD WORK.
SO THAT'S IT'S PROBLEMATIC TO
BUSINESS AS A AS THIS
DESIGNATION THAT WOULD ALLOW
THAT KIND OF DEVELOPMENT AS
IT'S BEEN PROPOSED.
I PUT THAT ON THE TABLE.
I LIKE THE SITE PLAN.
I FITS REALLY WELL WITH THIS
THING.
WHAT YOU'RE TRYING TO DO I HAVE
REAL RESERVATIONS ABOUT
UNCONDITIONED REZONING THAT
WOULD ALLOW SOMETHING WAY
BIGGER TO GO IN BY RIGHT.
ONCE THE ZONING HAS MADE IT FOR
THE RECORD, I TELLING YOU THAT
IF YOU PUT A CONDITION OUT OR
WILL APPROVE IT BECAUSE WE'RE
NOT ALLOWED TO DO THAT UNDER
THE MTA BUT I'M BUT I HAVE
RESERVATIONS ABOUT THIS ACTION
OBVIOUSLY BE CAREFUL HOW TO
ANSWER THIS.
BUT I THINK, YOU KNOW, FROM OUR
PERSPECTIVE WE WANT TO BUILD
THIS PROJECT AND THIS WAS THAT
THE VEHICLE TO DO THAT.
SO I THINK WE'RE WE'RE WILLING
TO DO WHAT WE NEED TO TO MOVE
FORWARD WITH THIS SPECIFIC
DEVELOPMENT IF THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT, YOU KNOW, THE CITY IS
LOOKING FOR.
WE JUST FELT THAT OUR FORTE AND
OUR FOR B JUST TO GET THE 60
PERCENT OR WHATEVER IT IS JUST
WAS WAS VERY ONEROUS AND THE PD
JUST HAD SUCH ADDITIONAL THINGS
THAT THAT WOULDN'T REALLY MAKE
SENSE.
SO LISTEN, I THINK WE'RE
AMENABLE TO THAT.
>> IT'S IT'S WE DO NOT WANT TO
SWITCH UP AND SHOW YOU
SOMETHING DIFFERENT LATER.
SO WE'RE I THINK WE'D BE
COMFORTABLE IF THAT'S A
CONVERSATION MAYBE THAT'S AT
THE COUNCIL LEVEL BUT WE'RE I
UNDERSTAND I HAVE THOSE SAME
CONCERNS AND WE'RE WE'RE WE
WANT TO BUILD THIS PROJECT AND
THAT'S HOW WE'D LIKE TO MOVE
FORWARD.
DO WE HAVE OTHER COMMISSIONER
COMMENTS?
OK, I GUESS I THINK THE VAST
MAJORITY OF MY NOTES HAVE BEEN
MOSTLY COVERED WHICH HAD TO DO
WITH A LOT OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENTS REGARDING SANITARY
THAT I THINK WASTEWATER WAS
COVERED ALREADY.
>> I DO WANT TO EMPHASIZE THE
IMPORTANCE OF COORDINATING IN
THE FUTURE WITH LAND USE AND
TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE.
>> SO AGAIN THINKING THROUGH
CONNECTIVITY OF CROSSWALKS OR
RAPID FLASHING SIGN ON SALE
CHURCH OF I LEGITIMATELY THINK
ACTION IS COVERED EVERYTHING.
SO THE ONLY ITEM THAT I WOULD
ACTUALLY MENTION IS THAT THE R
FOR E AND I DO WANT TO CLARIFY
I PULLED THE UDC SPECIFICALLY
BECAUSE I HEARD A FEW PUBLIC
COMMENTS ON OUR FOUR E'S
APPROPRIATENESS AND THE
NECESSITY OF BEING ON A TRANSIT
CORRIDOR.
I'M JUST GOING TO READ THE
LANGUAGE FOR MULTIPLE FAMILY
DWELLING DISTRICT IS INTENDED
TO PERMIT HIGH DENSITY MULTIPLE
FAMILY DEVELOPMENT ALONG
SIGNATURE TRANSIT CORRIDORS AS
IDENTIFIED IN THE CITY'S MASTER
PLAN.
>> I WOULD WITH NEARBY ACCESS
TO PUBLIC LAND SCHOOLS, SHOPS
AND PERSONAL SERVICES SO THE
DENHA BOUNDARY AND SO I THINK
THERE'S AN INTENT TO PERMIT
HIGH DENSITY LONG SIGNATURE
TRANSIT CORRIDORS.
I WOULD ACTUALLY ARGUE THAT AN
RESEALING ROAD IS A FAIRLY
LARGE VEHICULAR THOROUGHFARE
FROM THAT STANDPOINT THERE IS
ACCESS TO SCHOOLS, SHOPS,
PERSONAL SERVICES AND
CONNECTIVITY FROM THAT
STANDPOINT.
SO I DO WANT TO GIVE CREDENCE
TO EVERYBODY THAT SPOKE ON IT.
SO I DO WANT TO RECOGNIZE THAT
BUT ALSO JUST MY PURE READING
OF THE UDC.
IT'S THE INTENT BEHIND IT AND I
THINK THE SIGNATURE TRANSIT
CORRIDOR I DON'T KNOW THAT IT
MEANT SPECIFICALLY T.S.A. ONE
OR TWO OR CAPITALIZED TERM THAT
HAS A SPECIFIC TEATHER
DEFINITION WITHIN THE UDC.
>> BUT I DO WANT TO AGAIN GIVE
CREDENCE WE HEAR YA.
I THINK MY READING OF IT'S
SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT.
>> I ALSO WANT TO ADDRESS
SHADOW CASTING WITH RESPECT TO
BECAUSE I THINK THE LAST
COMMENT WAS ACTUALLY ON SOLAR
OR THE PROHIBITION OF SOLAR
BASICALLY SAYING HEY YOU'RE
KILLING OUR SUNLIGHT TO A
CERTAIN EXTENT JUST TAKING A
LOOK AT, YOU KNOW, THE THE KIND
OF OPTIMAL TIME FOR SOLAR TO
HAPPEN IS GOING TO BE KIND
OF AT THAT NOON TIME.
AND SO IF YOU LOOK AT THE
ORIENTATION OF THE OVERALL SITE
ON AUDOBON LIKE I SEE RISES IN
THE EAST AND TOWARDS KIND
OF LIKE THE BETWEEN 11:00 AND
THREE O'CLOCK TIME PERIOD, I
FEEL LIKE THERE'S ACTUALLY
GOING TO BE SUFFICIENT AMOUNT
OF LIGHT THAT STILL HITS ANY
SITES THAT ARE EVEN TO THE WEST
OF IT.
AND SO JUST WANTED TO THINK
THROUGH FROM THAT STANDPOINT.
I JUST WANT TO GIVE RECOGNITION
FOR THE FOLKS I SPOKE HERE.
IT'S WE DO REALLY APPRECIATE
THE COMMENTS AND I WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE RESPONDING TO
THEM THOROUGHLY AND I THINK THE
REST OF THE COMMISSION HAS DONE
A STRONG JOB IN COVERING THOSE
.
>> I SHARE THE CONCERN ABOUT
OUR FOUR YEARS UNLIMITED HEIGHT
AS WELL.
THERE IS AS AS MY FORMER LAW
PROFESSOR ACTUALLY NOTED PART
OF THE MISSION PLANNING
ENABLING ACT.
THAT'S NOT SOMETHING WE CAN
NECESSARILY CREATE CONDITIONS
BUT NEVERTHELESS I THINK THIS
IS AN APPROPRIATE SITE PLAN FOR
THAT PORTION.
>> ANY OTHER THOUGHTS BEFORE WE
PUT THIS TO A TO MAKE MY POINT
CLEAR I AM IN FAVOR OF THE
ANNEXATION.
I'M IN FAVOR OF THE SITE PLAN.
I DON'T THINK I CAN VOTE TO
RECOMMEND THE REZONING GIVEN MY
CONCERN ABOUT THE FACT THAT
THAT WOULD BE RIGHT ALLOWED NOW
A MUCH LARGER PROJECT TO BE
BUILT BY WRIGHT WITHOUT ANY
CONSTRICTIONS.
I CAN'T I CAN'T SEE
RECOMMENDING THAT THAT'S A GOOD
THING TO THE CITY COUNCIL TO
DO.
>> GOT IT.
AND THEN PROCEDURALLY SPEAKING,
WHAT WOULD IT TAKE?
THIS IS A QUESTION TO STAFF
ABOUT ACTUALLY TAKING NOW.
I MEAN WE STARTED THE MOTIONS
ON A TOGETHER BASIS.
>> THAT'S WHAT I WAS GOING TO
SAY.
I MADE THE MOTION SO I CAN
WITHDRAW THE MOTION AND THAT WE
CAN TAKE THEM ONE AT A TIME AND
THOSE WHO WANT TO VOTE AGAINST
THE ARE FORTY COULD VOTE
AGAINST IT AND THE THAT WAY WE
DON'T KILL THE WHOLE THING
BECAUSE YOU FEEL THE NEED TO
VOTE NOW.
OK, SO I'M HAPPY TO WITHDRAW MY
MOTION COUNCILMAN FOR DISH HAS
TO AGREE AND SHE'S ACTUALLY OK
OK SO THANK YOU FOR THE
DISCUSSION AND WE HAVE NOW YOU
WITHDRAW MY MOTION THE SECOND
DEGREE SO YOU CAN REALLY TAKE
IT ONE AT A TIME.
OK SO I AM NOW GOING TO
INTRODUCE THE PETITION BUT WE
COULD DO IT INDIVIDUALLY.
I WANT TO SAY I'M SORRY
PETITIONER WOULD YOU LIKE TO.
YEAH I GUESS I JUST LIKE
CLARIFICATION WHAT THAT EXACTLY
MEANS THEN SO I MEAN OBVIOUSLY
THE ANNEXATION FROM A TIME
STANDPOINT IS WHAT I NEED TO
MOVE FORWARD WITH QUICKLY.
I DON'T KNOW WHAT THAT MEANS IF
THERE'S NO RECOMMENDATION FOR
FOR ZONING.
SO I HAVEN'T REALLY THAT
ATTORNEY WOULD GO SO RIGHT.
THE ANNEXATION CAN PROCEED
OBVIOUSLY BECAUSE WE CAN ZONE
IN ANYWAY UNTIL COMES BACK FROM
THE STATE.
SO THAT WOULD JUST KIND BE
HANGING OUT THERE.
SO THERE'S A COUPLE OF OPTIONS
WITH THAT IF THE ANNEXATION
COULD BE APPROVED GO FORWARD.
THE SITE PLAN THOUGH WOULD
WOULD NOT WE WOULDN'T WANT TO,
YOU KNOW, PUSH FOR THE SITE
PLAN WITHOUT A ZONING.
THERE'S ALSO AN OPTION STAFF
CAN CAN WORK WITH THE
PETITIONER IF THE PETITIONERS,
YOU KNOW, OFFERS ANYTHING TO
DESTROY MY SORRY IF THE
PETITIONER IS WILLING TO WORK
WITH STAFF ON ANY KIND OF THAT
CONDITIONAL ARRANGEMENT THAT
CAN BE SOMETHING THAT COULD BE
ADDED BETWEEN PLANNING
COMMISSION AND COUNCIL WITH
WITH THE OBVIOUSLY THE THE
FEEDBACK FROM THE PLANNING
COMMISSION THAT PLANNING
COMMISSION YOU KNOW, IF THE
CONDITION WAS OFFERED PLANNING
COMMISSION DID SUPPORT THAT
CONDITION WITH THAT REZONING
GOING TO COUNCIL SO THAT COULD
BE ADDED AFTER PLANNING
COMMISSION APPROVAL TO GO
FORWARD AND THAT WOULD BE RE
NOTICED AT THE CITY COUNCIL
THAT WOULD INCLUDE A
CONDITIONAL REZONING AND THEN
THAT AGAIN REMEMBER THE
ANNEXATION TAKES A WHILE TO
STATE AND THEN WHEN THAT COMES
BACK WE WE WILL CONNECT THE
SITE PLAN AND THE ZONING THAT
WOULD GO TO COUNCIL.
>> SO TO BE PERFECTLY CLEAR,
WHAT I'M HEARING IS THAT IF WE
TOOK THESE THREE SEPARATELY THE
SITE PLANNING DEVELOPMENT IF
THE SO SO THE ANNEXATION CAN BE
RECOMMENDED THAT I THINK IS
PRETTY CLEAR.
>> HOWEVER, IN THE EVENT WE
WERE NOT TO SUPPORT THE
REZONING FROM TOWNSHIP TO AH
FOR E THEN THE RECOMMENDATION
TO APPROVE THE SITE PLAN SHOULD
ALSO LOGICALLY NOT FOLLOW
BECAUSE OF THE FACT THAT WHAT I
MEAN WELL OK WE DON'T HAVE A
ZONING I MEAN YOU ARE A
RECOMMENDING BODY SO THE
COUNCIL CAN APPROVE THE SITE
PLAN AND IF AGAIN IF THE ZONING
WELL ACTUALLY THEY COULD
APPROVE THE ZONING ANYWAY
BECAUSE THEY YOU GUYS ARE THE
RECOMMENDING BODY IN THIS CASE.
BUT AGAIN WE WANT IT TO BE
CLEAR I GUESS YOU HAVE BEEN
CLEAR THAT YOU'RE YOU'RE AN
YOU
AS IN THE PLANNING COMMISSION
ARE OK WITH THE SITE PLAN BUT
YOU HAVE THESE CONCERNS ABOUT
THE ZONING GODCHAUX SO I DON'T
KNOW IF I WOULD WANT STARTING
OFF TWENTY TWENTY FIVE WITH A
BANG OK I JUST SO LET'S SAY WE
TAKE ALL THREE FIRST PASSES,
THE REZONING FAILS AND THEN THE
SITE PLAN PASSES THAT WOULD BE
A SIGNAL TO THE DEVELOPER THAT
BEFORE GOING TO COUNCIL HE MAY
NEED TO MAKE A AMENDMENT TO HIS
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT TO MOVE
THAT ALONG AS OPPOSED TO US
TRYING TO SOLVE THAT PROBLEM
HERE AT THE TABLE SINCE WE'RE
JUST RECOMMENDING IT TO THE
NEXT BODY AND WE HAVE
RESTRICTIONS LEGALLY AND WHAT
WE CAN ASK FOR PERSONALLY I
HAVE NO PROBLEM WITH OUR FOUR E
IF YOU WANT TO BUILD A HUNDRED
TWENTY STOREY BUILDING I WOULD
WELCOME THAT AGAIN NINE HUNDRED
FEET AWAY.
SO MR. LEONARD SO ARE YOU ON
THE I WAS JUST GOING TO SUGGEST
THAT YOU SO I WOULD I WOULD
CAUTION THE PLANNING COMMISSION
FROM TAKING ACTION AFFIRMATIVE
ACTION ON SITE PLAN THAT WE
HAVE MEASURED AND PRESENTED TO
YOU MEETS THE HOUR FOR YOU
ZONING IF YOU DON'T RECOMMEND
FOR REZONING I DON'T KNOW HOW
YOU WOULD APPROVE THAT SITE
BENEFIT IF IT DOESN'T MEET.
SO I DECIDED WE WOULD NEED MORE
TIME TO TELL YOU WHETHER OR NOT
OUR ADVICE IS THAT METEORITE
RELATED TO OR IF YOU WANT TO
SIT AT YOUR AT THE TABLE AND
FIND ANOTHER DISTRICT BY WHICH
IT WOULD WORK AND GO THROUGH
THE CODE TO MAKE SURE THAT I
WOULD RECOMMEND IT THAT'S WHAT
I WOULD ADVISE IS ANOTHER
ALTERNATIVE IS YOU COULD TAKE
ACTION ON THE ANNEXATION, YOU
COULD POSTPONE ACTION ON THE
ZONING AND SAY LAND.
YEP.
MR. LAUFFER AND THEN CONTINUE
TO WORK WITH STAFF.
YOU COULD DISCUSS WHETHER OR
NOT HE MIGHT BE INTERESTED IN
OFFERING A CONDITIONAL ZONING
REQUIREMENT.
IT SEEMS LIKE HEIGHT IS THE
ONLY ISSUE THAT I'VE HEARD
VOICED THAT WOULD ENABLE THE
ANNEXATION TO MOVE FORWARD
WHICH I THINK IS PROBABLY GOING
TO BE IMPORTANT FOR HIM
UNDERSTANDING HE'S PROBABLY GOT
MILESTONE'S AS AN ASSOCIATION
WITH THE PURCHASE OF THAT
PROPERTY THAT WOULD HELP MOVE
THAT FORWARD.
BUT I WANT TO BE CLEAR I WOULD
THEN THAT'S GOING TO HAVE TO
COME BACK HERE DESPITE THE
ANNEXATION.
GOSH, I'D LIKE TO HEAR FROM THE
PETITIONER ON THE PROPERTY.
I MEAN I CAME IN READY TO
PROPOSE A CONDITIONAL REZONING
SO I JUST DIDN'T I DON'T KNOW
THE PROCESS.
>> I AM A PLANNER BUT WE IF YOU
COME IN SAYING BASICALLY WE
WANT TO BUILD THIS PROJECT SO
I'M COMFORTABLE WITH PROPOSING
A CONDITION IN THE DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT.
YOU KNOW, IF IT'S FOUR STORIES
AND FIFTY FEET WE WOULD BE
COMFORTABLE DOING THAT AND I
DON'T THINK THERE'S ANY ISSUE
FROM FROM THE OWNER'S
PERSPECTIVE ON THAT AS WELL.
>> CAN I I JUST WANT BECAUSE IT
WOULDN'T BE A REQUIREMENT
OF THE DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT A
CONDITIONAL ZONING WOULD
ACTUALLY BE AN AFFIRMATIVE
OFFERING BY YOU THAT YOU ARE
SEEKING REZONING OF THIS
PROPERTY TO OFFER FOR YOU WITH
CONDITIONS THE DISTINCTION WITH
THAT WOULD BE IS THAT WOULD BE
TIED TO ANY CONDITION THAT YOU
WERE TO VOLUNTARILY OFFER WOULD
BE TIED TO THE ZONING OF THE
ZONE.
IT WOULD BE DISTINCT FROM THE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT OR IF YOU
SOLD THIS PROPERTY WOULD
PROCEED TO GO WITH THAT
PROPERTY.
SO IF THAT WAS SOMETHING YOU
WERE COMFORTABLE WITH OFFERING
THE MECHANISM BY WHICH WE WOULD
DO IT, WE WOULD ACTUALLY DRAFT
A CONDITIONAL ZONING OF THE
STATEMENTS.
IT WOULD BE RECORDED IN A
SIMILAR TIME WITH THE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT BUT I
WANT TO BE CLEAR IT WOULD BE AN
ADDITIONAL BEYOND THE
SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT WE WOULD
WE WOULD BE COMFORTABLE
PROPOSING THAT.
OK, SO IF THAT'S THE CASE I I'M
COMFORTABLE HEARING THAT IS A
VOLUNTARY OFFER BUT ONE THING
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A MAXIMUM
HEIGHT.
I WOULD ADVISE THAT IF YOU WERE
GOING TO PROVIDE A MAXIMUM
HEIGHT RESTRICTION AS THE SOLE
CONDITION THAT YOU'RE CLEAR
THAT THAT THAT IS WHAT YOU'RE
PROPOSING AND WHAT THAT HEIGHT
WOULD BE THAT'S IMPORTANT FOR
US TO KNOW.
I WOULD ADVISE YOU TO NOT
PROPOSE THAT IT IS EXACTLY WHAT
THE HEIGHT OF YOUR PLACE ARE.
THINGS ARE SO SO IF THAT WERE
YOU SAID FIFTY.
YES.
SO I AM COMFORTABLE THAT IF WE
DECIDED TO CLEARLY VOLUNTARILY
WE PROVIDED OPTIONS BY WHICH HE
COULD CONSIDER THIS OUTSIDE
OF THIS IF IT WAS THE DESIRE
OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION YOU
COULD PASS CONSIDER THAT MOTION
WITH A CONDITION THAT YOU
RECOMMEND THAT IT BE DONE WITH
A CONDITIONAL ZONING WITH A
MAXIMUM LIMIT OF DEFEAT AS THE
PETITIONER HAS HAS SCOPED.
WE WOULD THEN WORK WITH THE
PETITIONER TO MAKE SURE THAT
THAT IS MEMORIALIZE AND THE
CONDITIONAL STATEMENT ZONINGS
AND WE WOULD NOTICE THAT AT
SUNSET THE CITY COUNCIL OK, GOT
IT.
SO EFFECTIVELY WHAT WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT.
>> OH YES.
OH YES.
CAN I ASK A QUESTION IS WHAT
I'M WORRIED ABOUT BUT ARE THERE
OTHER IT LOOKS TO YOU LIKE THE
OTHER DIFFERENCES BETWEEN OUR
TWO IN OUR ARE THE SAME THEY'RE
NOT REALLY THE HEIGHT.
THAT'S RIGHT.
IT'S REALLY I HATE IT.
>> YEAH IT'S RIGHT.
OK SO I'M THEY HAVE ADDITIONAL
EXPLAINING MANAGER IS
COMFORTABLE THAT THAT WAS A
VOLUNTARY OFFER THAT I'M
COMFORTABLE PROCEEDING IN THAT
DIRECTION AND APPRECIATE THE
DEVELOPER PROPOSING THAT
VOLUNTARY OF COURSE VOLUNTARILY
OFFERED CONDITIONS.
SO TO BE CLEAR THEN WHAT WE
WOULD BE LOOKING FOR IS A
MOTION TO TAKE TO TO BASICALLY
AMEND THE SECOND MOTION WHICH
IS AND WE COULD TAKE THEM
SEPARATELY SO THAT WE CAN JUST
CLARIFY THIS.
>> LET'S I'M GOING TO START
WITH THE ALNWICK VERY
A SECOND
MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER DISH WE
ARE IN DISCUSSION OF NOW JUST
THAT ONE ANY DISCUSSION LET'S
GO TO A ROLL CALL VOTE AND I'M
JUST GOING TO READ IT JUST TO
BE CLEAR, ANN ARBOR CITY
PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDS
THAT THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
APPROVE THE ANNEXATION OF TWO
FIVE FIVE THREE ONE FIVE AND
THREE SEVEN ONE SIDE CHURCH
ROAD AND TWO ONE EIGHT ZERO AND
OBVIOUSLY ROAD.
>> LET'S CALL YOU COMMISSIONER
.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
WHICH YES, COMMISSIONER
HAMMERSCHMIDT.
YES.
COMMISSIONER DISH.
YES, COMMISSIONER MILLS.
YES, COMMISSIONER.
WHETHER YES COMMISSIONER.
ADAMS.
YES.
COMMISSIONER NORTON.
ANNEXATION PASSES.
YES.
>> OK, SO NOW WE HAVE THE
ANNEXATION PASSES.
SECOND ONE WHICH I NEED A
>> OK, SO NOW WE HAVE THE
MOTION TO AMEND SO I'VE MOVED
SECOND ONE WHICH I NEED A
BY COMMISSIONER WHICH SECONDED
MOTION TO AMEND SO I'VE MOVED
BY COMMISSIONER MILLS WE ARE IN
BY COMMISSIONER WHICH SECONDED
DISCUSSION THIS IS WITH RESPECT
BY COMMISSIONER MILLS WE ARE IN
TO THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
DISCUSSION THIS IS WITH RESPECT
RECOMMENDS THAT THE MAYOR CITY
TO THE CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
COUNCIL APPROVE THE ADDRESS
RECOMMENDS THAT THE MAYOR CITY
THAT WE DISCUSSED AND OBVIOUSLY
COUNCIL APPROVE THE ADDRESS
ROAD REZONING WITH CONDITIO
THAT WE DISCUSSED AND OBVIOUSLY
OF A HEIGHT RESTRICTION OF 50
ROAD REZONING WITH CONDITIO
FEET FROM TOWNSHIP TO OUR 40
OF A HEIGHT RESTRICTION OF 50
HAS VOLUNTARILY OFFERED THE
FEET FROM TOWNSHIP TO OUR 40
DEVELOPER THANK YOU VERY FIVE
HAS VOLUNTARILY OFFERED THE
OR AUKLETS NO BUT YES.
DEVELOPER THANK YOU VERY FIVE
OH YES.
OR AUKLETS NO BUT YES.
ONE THOUSAND.
OH YES.
>> OK, SO WE HAVE THE MOTIONS
ONE THOUSAND.
PLANNER LEONARD, DO YOU HAVE
>> OK, SO WE HAVE THE MOTIONS
THAT MOTION TO RECOMMEND
PLANNER LEONARD, DO YOU HAVE
REZONING TO OUR YOU WITH
THAT MOTION TO RECOMMEND
CONDITIONS WITH THE SOLE
REZONING TO OUR YOU WITH
CONDITION BEING A MAXIMUM
CONDITIONS WITH THE SOLE
HEIGHT OF FIFTY FEET AS OFFERED
CONDITION BEING A MAXIMUM
BY THE PETITIONER CORRECT.
HEIGHT OF FIFTY FEET AS OFFERED
OK, DISCUSSION OK LET'S GO TO
BY THE PETITIONER CORRECT.
ROLL CALL VOTE WE WHICH THE
OK, DISCUSSION OK LET'S GO TO
MILLS AND JUST TO CLARIFY
ROLL CALL VOTE WE WHICH THE
YOU'LL BE WORKING PERFORM
MILLS AND JUST TO CLARIFY
CONDITIONAL RESERVE BETWEEN NOW
YOU'LL BE WORKING PERFORM
AND COUNCIL WE'LL WORK WITH THE
CONDITIONAL RESERVE BETWEEN NOW
PETITIONER.
AND COUNCIL WE'LL WORK WITH THE
THEY WILL ACTUALLY HAVE TO
PETITIONER.
PROVIDE THIS ACTUALLY IN
THEY WILL ACTUALLY HAVE TO
WRITING IN ADDITION TO THEIR
PROVIDE THIS ACTUALLY IN
VOLUNTARY OFFERING HERE AND
WRITING IN ADDITION TO THEIR
THEN WE'LL ALSO MEMORIALIZE IT
VOLUNTARY OFFERING HERE AND
AND RECORDED DOCUMENT FOR THE
THEN WE'LL ALSO MEMORIALIZE IT
PROPERTY COMMISSIONER EARLY.
AND RECORDED DOCUMENT FOR THE
YES COMMISSIONER WHICH YES.
PROPERTY COMMISSIONER EARLY.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
YES COMMISSIONER WHICH YES.
YES COMMISSIONER DISH YES.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
COMMISSIONER M. YES.
YES COMMISSIONER DISH YES.
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE.
COMMISSIONER M. YES.
YES.
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
YES.
COMMISSIONER NORTON.
MOTION HERE IS ALL RIGHT AND
YES.
WE'RE GOING TO TAKE THE FINAL
MOTION HERE IS ALL RIGHT AND
MOTION WHICH HAS TO DO WITH THE
WE'RE GOING TO TAKE THE FINAL
SITE PLAN THE DEVELOPMENT
MOTION WHICH HAS TO DO WITH THE
AGREEMENT.
SITE PLAN THE DEVELOPMENT
I NEED A MOTION COMMISSIONER M.
AGREEMENT.
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER
I NEED A MOTION COMMISSIONER M.
WHETHER IT BE DISCUSSION OF THE
SECONDED BY COMMISSIONER
PROPOSED MOTION.
WHETHER IT BE DISCUSSION OF THE
>> WE'RE GOING TO GO TO A VOTE.
PROPOSED MOTION.
I'M GOING TO READ THE PROPOSED
>> WE'RE GOING TO GO TO A VOTE.
MOTION AGAIN.
I'M GOING TO READ THE PROPOSED
IT'S IN OUR CITY PLANNING
MOTION AGAIN.
COMMISSION RECOMMENDS TO THE
IT'S IN OUR CITY PLANNING
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL APPROVED
COMMISSION RECOMMENDS TO THE
THE TWO BY FIVE THREE ONE FIVE
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL APPROVED
THREE SEVEN ONE SIDE CHURCH
THE TWO BY FIVE THREE ONE FIVE
ROAD AND TWO ONE EIGHT ZERO AND
THREE SEVEN ONE SIDE CHURCH
OBVIOUSLY ROAD SITE PLAN AND
ROAD AND TWO ONE EIGHT ZERO AND
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
OBVIOUSLY ROAD SITE PLAN AND
MR LUNNER COMMISSIONER YES
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
COMMISSIONER WHICH YES.
MR LUNNER COMMISSIONER YES
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
COMMISSIONER WHICH YES.
YES.
COMMISSIONER HAMMERSCHMIDT.
COMMISSIONER DISH YES.
YES.
COMMISSIONER M. YES.
COMMISSIONER DISH YES.
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE YES.
COMMISSIONER M. YES.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
COMMISSIONER WETHERBEE YES.
YES.
COMMISSIONER ADAMS.
COMMISSIONER NORTON.
YES.
MOTION CARRY THANK YOU FOR
SUPPORT.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
OK IT IS ONE OF TWO I THINK I
NEED AN AFFIRMATIVE YES TO
CONTINUE FROM PEOPLE YES.
OK ANYBODY OPPOSE ANYBODY NEED
A BREAK.
>> YOU NEED A BREAK.
OK LET'S LET THE NEXT
PRESENTATION AND I WOULD I
WOULD BE GRATEFUL IF YOU WOULD
CONTINUE TO AT LEAST HEAR OUR
STAFF PRESENT WHO HAS BEEN
HERE.
IT'LL BE UNDER TEN MINUTES.
YES TOTALLY REALLY COMFORTABLE
IF YOU'D LIKE TO POSTPONE THE
REMAINING ITEM.
>> UM, LET'S LET'S GO ON TO
OTHER BUSINESS STORMWATER
COMPREHENSIVE OVERVIEW PLEASE.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR PATIENCE.
ALL RIGHT.
THE CITY BANABA IS DEVELOPING A
COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN REFERRING TO
THE PROCESS OF CAPTURING AND
TREATING RUNOFF GENERATED BY
PRECIPITATION, RAIN AND
IMPLEMENTING A VARIETY
OF TECHNIQUES TO IMPROVE WATER
QUALITY AND REDUCE THE OVERALL
QUANTITY THAT MUST BE COLLECTED
AND TREATED IN LIGHT
OF INCREASED FREQUENCY AND
SEVERITY OF HIGH PRECIPITATION.
STORM EVENTS.
THE CITY IS DEVELOPING
STRATEGIC PLANS TO ADDRESS THE
COMMUNITY'S CURRENT AND
EMERGING STORM WATER NEEDS.
THIS PLAN WILL PRIORITIZE
ASSESSMENT AND ANALYSIS
OF CURRENT TECHNIQUES BUILDING
ON EXISTING SUCCESSFUL PROGRAMS
AND PREPARING FOR BOTH PRESENT
AND FUTURE CONDITIONS.
WE ARE LEADING BY EXAMPLE
REMAINING DEDICATED TO
COMMUNICATE THE PROJECT BEGAN
IN FALL TWENTY TWENTY FOUR IS
EXPECTED TO CONCLUDE IN JUNE
TWENTY TWENTY SIX AND WE HAVE
OUR WATER QUALITY MANAGER MISS
LAWSON.
WELCOME WELCOME TABLE.
>> THANK YOU ALL AND I ACTUALLY
DON'T MIND SITTING I WAS
SUPPORTING A STAFF MEMBER CARLA
COLEMAN IN HER CAPSID ACROSS
THE HALLWAY FROM HER AT MOST
OF THOSE MEETINGS THAT SHE WAS
TALKING ABOUT.
SO BUT AGAIN I ONLY HAVE A FEW
MINUTES.
THIS IS VERY INFORMATIONAL.
NO ACTION NECESSARY.
BUT I DID WANT TO GIVE THE
PLANNING COMMISSION AN UPDATE
ON OUR COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN SO
THE CITY IS
KICKING OFF A STORMWATER IT'S A
REALLY LONG ROAD.
WE CALL IT THE PLAN TO DOCUMENT
WHAT WE'VE BEEN DOING REALLY,
REALLY WELL FOR THE PAST
SEVERAL DECADES AND MEMORIALIZE
AND ESTABLISH PRINCIPLES TO HOW
WE MANAGE STORMWATER FOR THE
NEXT SEVERAL DECADES TO COME.
WE ARE VANGUARDS IN THE GREAT
LAKES REGION.
WE RECOGNIZE THAT WE ARE
LEADING BY EXAMPLE.
OFTENTIMES WE CONSIDER
OURSELVES AT THE BLEEDING BUT
WHAT WE REALLY DO WELL IS
LISTEN TO OUR COMMUNITY AND
MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE MAKING
THOSE BEST DECISIONS TO MANAGE
STORMWATER HOLISTICALLY AS WE
LOOK AT OUR INFRASTRUCTURE AND
RESOURCES.
SO OUR SPECIFIC GOALS FOR THIS
PROJECT ASSESSMENT ANALYSIS,
BUILDING ON PAST SUCCESSES,
PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE
LEADING BY EXAMPLE AND
DEDICATING OURSELVES TO THE
COMMUNITY SO AGAIN, AS I
MENTIONED, THERE'S A LOT
OF THINGS THAT WE DO REALLY
WELL AND WE WANT TO EXIST.
WE WANT TO CAPITALIZE AND BUILD
ON THOSE EXISTING PROGRAMS FOR
EXAMPLE, OUR STORMWATER UTILITY
IS ONE OF NINE IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN AND MANY
MUNICIPALITIES ARE USING IT AS
AN EXAMPLE AS THEY THINK ABOUT
FUTURE STORMWATER PLANNING IN
THEIR OWN MUNICIPALITIES.
IN ADDITION, WE'RE ALSO LOOKING
AT HOW WE CAN ALIGN SEVERAL
OF OUR OWN STORMWATER
PRINCIPLES AND COLLABORATIVE
EFFORTS WITH A TWO ZERO PLAN.
SPECIFICALLY THESE EIGHT ZERO
PLAN FOCUSES ON RESILIENCY AND
IN MANY, MANY AREAS IN THE CITY
WHERE IT DOESN'T COMPLETELY
ALIGN IS WITH STORMWATER.
THERE'S ONLY ONE MENTION
STORMWATER IN THE TWO ZERO PLAN
WE'RE AWARE OF THAT.
BUT WHAT WE ALSO RECOGNIZE IS
THAT STORMWATER IS SORT
OF HEROLD'S OWN ENDEAVORS AND
WE MANAGE IT BOTH FROM THE
ASSET MANAGEMENT STANDPOINT AS
WELL AS A WATER QUALITY
STANDPOINT.
SO FROM A SORT OF ECOLOGICAL
BENEFIT AS WELL AS A SERVICES
PROVIDED BENEFIT.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE VERY
,VERY STRONGLY INCLUDE IN THE
WAY THAT WE MANAGE STORMWATER
IS LISTENING TO OUR COMMUNITY.
OFTENTIMES PEOPLE THINK ABOUT
STORMWATER IN THE ARENA THAT IT
FLOODS.
THEY SEE IT, THEY KNOW IT'S
FLOODING, THEY SEE STANDING
WATER AND IT'S OFTEN TIMES
WHERE WE HEAR THE MOST.
BUT THERE'S I WOULD SAY SO MUCH
MORE BEHIND THE SCENES
UNDERGROUND.
OFTENTIMES WE BIG DIG HOLES AND
NOBODY REALLY KNOWS WHAT
THEY'RE FOR IS TO MANAGE THAT
STORMWATER SO WE DON'T SEE THE
PUDDLES SO WE DON'T SEE THE
STANDING WATER.
STORMWATER IS OFTEN CONSIDERED
ONE OF THE MORE FORGOTTEN
ASSETS BECAUSE IT DOESN'T
NECESSARILY TURN ON WHEN YOU
TURN THE FAUCET ON YOUR HOUSE
OR IT DOESN'T GO AWAY WHEN YOU
FLUSH THE TOILET.
SO IT IS SORT OF THAT THIRD
ASSET THAT WE PRIORITIZE.
SO A FEW OF THE TOP LINE
MESSAGES THAT WE ARE GOING TO
BE FOCUSING ON IN OUR
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AS I
MENTIONED THAT WE'RE LOOKING AT
IT HOLISTICALLY AND THAT'S
INCLUDING WATER QUALITY
FLOODING LAND USE DEVELOPMENT
HOW DEVELOPMENT IS SORT OF THE
NEXUS OR OPPORTUNITY FOR
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT INTO THE
FUTURE MAINTENANCE WHICH IS
OFTEN ONE OF THOSE THINGS THAT
THE RESIDENTS DON'T LIKE TO
THINK ABOUT.
BUT WE HAVE OVER FIVE HUNDRED
MILES OF STORMWATER CONVEYANCE
THAT WE HAVE TO MAINTAIN THAT
ARE ALREADY EXISTING AND THAT
PLAYS VERY, VERY IMPORTANTLY
INTO HOW WE MANAGE STORMWATER
AND YOU MENTIONED BUT WE ALSO
LOOK AT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
FROM A HABITAT IN ECOLOGY
STANDPOINT BECAUSE IT'S NOT
JUST THE PIPES IN THE GROUND,
IT'S ALSO THE HABITAT AND THE
ENVIRONMENT THAT WE'RE CREATING
FOR THE CRITTERS THAT DO LIVE
IN OUR COMMUNITY.
ANOTHER TOP LINE MESSAGE IS
THAT FLOODING DOES OCCUR AND
THERE IS NO WAY IN THE WORLD
THAT WE WILL BE ABLE TO CONTROL
FLOODING.
WE LOOK FOR PLANNING AND
MINIMIZING AND MITIGATING THOSE
OUTCOMES.
SO WHEN WE SAY STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT THAT DOES ENCOMPASS
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT, FLOODING
MANAGEMENT NOT FLOOD CONTROL.
I ALSO DID MENTION THAT THIS
PROJECT IS THE FIRST OF ITS
KIND IN THE GREAT LAKES REGION
.
THERE IS NO OTHER COMMUNITY IN
THE GREAT LAKES REGION THAT HAS
A COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT PLAN OF THE CALIBER
THAT WE'RE LOOKING AT.
THE ONE THAT WE'RE AWARE OF IN
THE NATION IS BOULDER, COLORADO
AND WONDERFULLY AND SOMEWHAT
IRONICALLY THE CONSULTANT THAT
WE HIRED TO WORK ON OUR PLAN
ALSO WROTE THE BOULDER PLAN AND
A DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT
ARE SORT OF KEY BECAUSE AGAIN
THEY ARE THEY ARE BASED ON
OPPORTUNITIES.
THE CITY DOES NOT OWN ALL THE
LAND AND SO THERE IS A DEFINITE
PARTNERSHIP WITH LANDOWNERS,
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS AND
PROPERTIES ON HOW WE CAN MANAGE
STORMWATER, COLLABORATE
COLLABORATIVELY INTO THE NEXT
SEVERAL DECADES AND THE LAST IS
REALLY IMPORTANT.
WE WILL BE HAVING A SIGNIFICANT
STAKEHOLDER ASPECT TO THIS
PROJECT.
BUT WHAT WE REALLY WANT TO
THINK ABOUT IS NOT JUST THE
PEOPLE THAT ARE COMING
COMPLAINING AND GIVING INPUT ON
THE FLOODING OR THE WATER THAT
THEY'RE SEEING ON THEIR
PROPERTIES.
BUT BECAUSE WE'RE GOING TO BE
LOOKING AT STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT WHOLLY AND REGIONAL
WE'RE LOOKING LARGER THAN JUST
JOE HOMEOWNER, WE'RE LOOKING AT
REALLY MORE OF THOSE
OPPORTUNITIES THAT CAN CREATE A
BETTER COMMUNITY.
WE'RE NOT DISMISSING THOSE
EXPERIENCES.
CONCERNS.
WE'RE NOT DISMISSING THOSE
BUT THIS PLAN IS MEANT TO BE
CONCERNS.
CITY WIDE AND COMMUNITY WIDE.
BUT THIS PLAN IS MEANT TO BE
SO IF YOU TIMELINE'S THAT I
CITY WIDE AND COMMUNITY WIDE.
WANT TO GIVE TO YOU, YOU WON'T
SO IF YOU TIMELINE'S THAT I
SEE ME IN PERSON AGAIN FOR
WANT TO GIVE TO YOU, YOU WON'T
PROBABLY ANOTHER YEAR AND A
SEE ME IN PERSON AGAIN FOR
HALF.
PROBABLY ANOTHER YEAR AND A
IT'S ABOUT AN 18 MONTH PROJECT
HALF.
BUT WE WILL BE HAVING
IT'S ABOUT AN 18 MONTH PROJECT
SIGNIFICANT PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
BUT WE WILL BE HAVING
BOTH VIRTUALLY THROUGH OUR SOON
SIGNIFICANT PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
TO BE RELEASED ENGAGEMENT HUB
BOTH VIRTUALLY THROUGH OUR SOON
THAT WILL BE A VERY EXCITING
TO BE RELEASED ENGAGEMENT HUB
WAY FOR OUR COMMUNITY TO NOT
THAT WILL BE A VERY EXCITING
JUST READ SOMETHING ON THE
WAY FOR OUR COMMUNITY TO NOT
WEBSITE BUT ACTUALLY ENGAGE
JUST READ SOMETHING ON THE
WITH GIVING COMMENT, GIVING
WEBSITE BUT ACTUALLY ENGAGE
INPUT FOR OUR ENTIRE PROJECT.
WITH GIVING COMMENT, GIVING
WE ARE GOING TO BE HAVING
INPUT FOR OUR ENTIRE PROJECT.
NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS.
WE ARE GOING TO BE HAVING
WE'RE GOING TO BE COLLABORATING
NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS.
WITH WATERSHED GROUPS AND WE
WE'RE GOING TO BE COLLABORATING
ALSO ARE GOING TO HAVE A
WITH WATERSHED GROUPS AND WE
STORMWATER ADVISORY GROUP WHICH
ALSO ARE GOING TO HAVE A
IS A HIGH LEVEL TECHNICAL GROUP
STORMWATER ADVISORY GROUP WHICH
THAT WILL BE MEETING SIX TIMES
IS A HIGH LEVEL TECHNICAL GROUP
THROUGHOUT THE YEAR AND ONE
THAT WILL BE MEETING SIX TIMES
QUICK PLUG IN MATT KNOWS THIS
THROUGHOUT THE YEAR AND ONE
WE WILL BE HOPEFULLY LOOKING AT
QUICK PLUG IN MATT KNOWS THIS
ONE OF YOU TO BE A
WE WILL BE HOPEFULLY LOOKING AT
REPRESENTATIVE OF PLANNING
ONE OF YOU TO BE A
COMMISSION ON OUR STORM WATER
REPRESENTATIVE OF PLANNING
ADVISORY GROUP NOT TO BE
COMMISSION ON OUR STORM WATER
DECIDED TONIGHT BUT I CERTAINLY
ADVISORY GROUP NOT TO BE
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT THE
DECIDED TONIGHT BUT I CERTAINLY
PLANNING COMMISSION DOES HAVE
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT THE
AN OPPORTUNITY AND A VOICE AT
PLANNING COMMISSION DOES HAVE
THE TABLE.
AN OPPORTUNITY AND A VOICE AT
WE ALSO WILL RESEARCH REACHING
THE TABLE.
OUT TO THE ENVIRONMENTAL
WE ALSO WILL RESEARCH REACHING
COMMISSION LOOKING FOR A
OUT TO THE ENVIRONMENTAL
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THEM AS
COMMISSION LOOKING FOR A
WELL.
REPRESENTATIVE FROM THEM AS
BUT THAT TECHNICAL GROUP IS
WELL.
GOING TO I'M SORRY STORMWATER
BUT THAT TECHNICAL GROUP IS
ADVISORY GROUP AS I MENTIONED,
GOING TO I'M SORRY STORMWATER
IT'S A HIGHLY TECHNICAL GROUP.
ADVISORY GROUP AS I MENTIONED,
WE'RE LOOKING AT LOCAL REGIONAL
IT'S A HIGHLY TECHNICAL GROUP.
EXPERTS IN BOTH CLIMATE
WE'RE LOOKING AT LOCAL REGIONAL
RESILIENCY, STORMWATER
EXPERTS IN BOTH CLIMATE
MANAGEMENT, CLIMATE ADAPTATION
RESILIENCY, STORMWATER
STRATEGIES.
MANAGEMENT, CLIMATE ADAPTATION
AND SO WE'RE GOING TO BE
STRATEGIES.
BRINGING A LOT OF THE EXPERTS
AND SO WE'RE GOING TO BE
THAT WE DO HAVE IN OUR OWN
BRINGING A LOT OF THE EXPERTS
BACKYARD BUT ALSO REACHING OUT
THAT WE DO HAVE IN OUR OWN
TO SOME KOG BRINGING IN SOME
BACKYARD BUT ALSO REACHING OUT
OF THEIR CLIMATE SPECIALISTS AS
TO SOME KOG BRINGING IN SOME
WELL ACTUALLY.
OF THEIR CLIMATE SPECIALISTS AS
AND AS I MENTIONED BEFORE, YOU
WELL ACTUALLY.
WON'T BE SEEING ME FOR 18
AND AS I MENTIONED BEFORE, YOU
MONTHS.
WON'T BE SEEING ME FOR 18
WE'RE LOOKING AT PROJECT
MONTHS.
COMPLETION ABOUT JUNE TWENTY
WE'RE LOOKING AT PROJECT
SIXTH.
COMPLETION ABOUT JUNE TWENTY
WE HAVE A LOT OF SIGNIFICANT
SIXTH.
TECHNICAL MEMOS THAT WILL BE
WE HAVE A LOT OF SIGNIFICANT
AVAILABLE FOR THE PROJECT TEAM.
TECHNICAL MEMOS THAT WILL BE
BUT THIS IS SORT OF THE BEHIND
AVAILABLE FOR THE PROJECT TEAM.
THE SCENES WE'RE GOING TO BE
BUT THIS IS SORT OF THE BEHIND
RECOLLAPSE GRADING AND UPDATING
THE SCENES WE'RE GOING TO BE
OUR STORMWATER MODEL WHICH IS A
RECOLLAPSE GRADING AND UPDATING
KEY ENGINEERING PIECE ON HOW WE
OUR STORMWATER MODEL WHICH IS A
MANAGE AND MAINTAIN OUR
KEY ENGINEERING PIECE ON HOW WE
STORMWATER SYSTEM.
MANAGE AND MAINTAIN OUR
BUT MORE SIGNIFICANTLY IS THE
STORMWATER SYSTEM.
TIMELINE.
BUT MORE SIGNIFICANTLY IS THE
AS I MENTIONED, THERE'S GOING
TIMELINE.
TO BE STAKEHOLDER MEETINGS
AS I MENTIONED, THERE'S GOING
THROUGHOUT THE PROCESS, THE
TO BE STAKEHOLDER MEETINGS
STORMWATER ADVISORY GROUP AND
THROUGHOUT THE PROCESS, THE
THERE'S GOING TO BE GENERAL
STORMWATER ADVISORY GROUP AND
PUBLIC MEETINGS HELD IN THE
THERE'S GOING TO BE GENERAL
BEGINNING OF TWENTY TWENTY SIX
PUBLIC MEETINGS HELD IN THE
WHICH WILL BE THE LARGEST, MOST
BEGINNING OF TWENTY TWENTY SIX
I'LL SAY THE FINAL ISH PROJECT
WHICH WILL BE THE LARGEST, MOST
MADE AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INPUT
I'LL SAY THE FINAL ISH PROJECT
AND COMMENT.
MADE AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INPUT
BUT IF THERE IS A PLANNING
AND COMMENT.
COMMISSION MEMBER WHICH I HOPE
BUT IF THERE IS A PLANNING
THERE IS, WE WOULD LOOK FORWARD
COMMISSION MEMBER WHICH I HOPE
TO MEETING WITH YOU
THERE IS, WE WOULD LOOK FORWARD
PERIODICALLY THROUGHOUT THE
TO MEETING WITH YOU
PROJECT AND THAT WAS THAT QUICK
PERIODICALLY THROUGHOUT THE
.
PROJECT AND THAT WAS THAT QUICK
WHAT I WILL SAY IS THIS IS A
.
PROJECT THAT I'M REALLY EXCITED
WHAT I WILL SAY IS THIS IS A
ABOUT AND I HAVE A LOT
PROJECT THAT I'M REALLY EXCITED
OF PASSION FOR THIS PROJECT.
ABOUT AND I HAVE A LOT
THIS IS A WONDERFUL, EXCITING
OF PASSION FOR THIS PROJECT.
THING FOR THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
THIS IS A WONDERFUL, EXCITING
AND FOR OUR COMMUNITY.
THING FOR THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
YEAH, QUESTIONS THERE MAY BE
AND FOR OUR COMMUNITY.
SOMEONE ELSE WHO WANTS TO DO
YEAH, QUESTIONS THERE MAY BE
THIS THAT WOULD BE TOTALLY OK
SOMEONE ELSE WHO WANTS TO DO
WITH THAT.
THIS THAT WOULD BE TOTALLY OK
I WAS JUST APPOINTED TO THE
WITH THAT.
MICHIGAN WATER ADVISORY COUNCIL
I WAS JUST APPOINTED TO THE
WHICH ADVISES YOU GO ON WATER
MICHIGAN WATER ADVISORY COUNCIL
STUFF.
WHICH ADVISES YOU GO ON WATER
SO I WAS GOING TO TALK TO YOU
STUFF.
ANYWAYS ABOUT BECAUSE I'M
SO I WAS GOING TO TALK TO YOU
SUPPOSED TO BE REPRESENTING
ANYWAYS ABOUT BECAUSE I'M
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, YOU KNOW,
SUPPOSED TO BE REPRESENTING
BEING BRETZ I'D LIKE TO BE ON
LOCAL GOVERNMENT, YOU KNOW,
YOUR ADVISORY GROUP BUT I'M
BEING BRETZ I'D LIKE TO BE ON
ALSO TOTALLY FINE IF ANYONE
YOUR ADVISORY GROUP BUT I'M
ELSE WANTS TO TAKE THAT ON.
ALSO TOTALLY FINE IF ANYONE
AT ANY RATE, I WANT TO CHAT
ELSE WANTS TO TAKE THAT ON.
WITH YOU AS I TAKE ON THAT TO
AT ANY RATE, I WANT TO CHAT
COMMISSIONER OR ELSE I'M
WITH YOU AS I TAKE ON THAT TO
CURIOUS YOU'RE COMING BEFORE US
COMMISSIONER OR ELSE I'M
AND MAYBE I DIDN'T LISTEN
CURIOUS YOU'RE COMING BEFORE US
CLEARLY ENOUGH AT THE BEGINNING
AND MAYBE I DIDN'T LISTEN
BUT IS THIS BEING ADOPTED
CLEARLY ENOUGH AT THE BEGINNING
THROUGH THE LIKE FORMAL
BUT IS THIS BEING ADOPTED
COMPREHEND A PLAN PROCESS
THROUGH THE LIKE FORMAL
INSTEAD?
COMPREHEND A PLAN PROCESS
THIS WILL BE LIKE A TECHNICAL
INSTEAD?
RESOURCE THAT WE REFER TO
THIS WILL BE LIKE A TECHNICAL
RATHER THAN IT BEING NOTICED TO
RESOURCE THAT WE REFER TO
OUR NEIGHBORS PER THE PLANNING
RATHER THAN IT BEING NOTICED TO
ENABLING ACT.
OUR NEIGHBORS PER THE PLANNING
IS THAT RIGHT?
ENABLING ACT.
LIKE THAT IS ABSOLUTELY CORRECT
IS THAT RIGHT?
.
LIKE THAT IS ABSOLUTELY CORRECT
WE CHOSE THE WORD COMPREHENSIVE
.
AS MORE OF A ALL ENCOMPASSING
WE CHOSE THE WORD COMPREHENSIVE
AND HOLISTIC PLAN NOT
AS MORE OF A ALL ENCOMPASSING
NECESSARILY THAT IT'S A LAND
AND HOLISTIC PLAN NOT
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
NECESSARILY THAT IT'S A LAND
IT JUST SO HAPPENS THAT ALL
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
OF THESE PROJECTS ARE HAPPENING
IT JUST SO HAPPENS THAT ALL
AT THE SAME TIME.
OF THESE PROJECTS ARE HAPPENING
SO WE ALSO I DON'T KNOW IF YOU
AT THE SAME TIME.
MENTIONED OR HEARD WHAT
SO WE ALSO I DON'T KNOW IF YOU
CAILLAUX ARE SAYING.
MENTIONED OR HEARD WHAT
WE ALSO HAVE A SANITARY
CAILLAUX ARE SAYING.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN GOING ON
WE ALSO HAVE A SANITARY
RIGHT.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN GOING ON
BUT THESE ARE THESE ARE MUCH
RIGHT.
MORE TECHNICAL PLANS BEHIND THE
BUT THESE ARE THESE ARE MUCH
SCENES ESTABLISHING HOW WE
MORE TECHNICAL PLANS BEHIND THE
MANAGE OUR UTILITIES.
SCENES ESTABLISHING HOW WE
>> GOT IT.
MANAGE OUR UTILITIES.
BUT THIS ONE PARTICULARLY I
>> GOT IT.
MEAN YOU REFERENCE WHAT HAPPENS
BUT THIS ONE PARTICULARLY I
ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WHICH IS
MEAN YOU REFERENCE WHAT HAPPENS
WHICH IS WITHIN OUR PURVIEW.
ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WHICH IS
I MEAN SOME OF THAT STUFF IS
WHICH IS WITHIN OUR PURVIEW.
STUFF THAT WE AT LEAST
I MEAN SOME OF THAT STUFF IS
REFERENCE IN THE UDC LIKE WHAT
STUFF THAT WE AT LEAST
ARE THE THE THINGS THAT COME
REFERENCE IN THE UDC LIKE WHAT
OUT OF YOUR OFFICE SO THERE IS
ARE THE THE THINGS THAT COME
A BIT OF MORE OF A NEXUS
OUT OF YOUR OFFICE SO THERE IS
BECAUSE IT'S NOT JUST WHAT
A BIT OF MORE OF A NEXUS
HAPPENS WROTE RIGHT AWAY.
BECAUSE IT'S NOT JUST WHAT
>> YES, THERE IS DEFINITELY A
HAPPENS WROTE RIGHT AWAY.
NEXUS ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU THINK
>> YES, THERE IS DEFINITELY A
ABOUT THE UDC BECAUSE A LOT
NEXUS ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU THINK
OF THE WAY A LOT OF THE
ABOUT THE UDC BECAUSE A LOT
MECHANISMS WE USE TO MANAGE
OF THE WAY A LOT OF THE
STORMWATER ARE LISTED WITHIN
MECHANISMS WE USE TO MANAGE
THE UDC FOR DEVELOPMENT FOR
STORMWATER ARE LISTED WITHIN
PRIVATE PROPERTIES AND THIS
THE UDC FOR DEVELOPMENT FOR
PLAN IS ACTUALLY GOING TO BE
PRIVATE PROPERTIES AND THIS
TAKING THOSE AND DOCUMENTING
PLAN IS ACTUALLY GOING TO BE
THEM AND THINKING HOW WE CAN
TAKING THOSE AND DOCUMENTING
IMPROVE UPON THOSE EVEN MORE
THEM AND THINKING HOW WE CAN
GREAT.
IMPROVE UPON THOSE EVEN MORE
I'M EXCITED.
GREAT.
>> QUICK QUESTIONS FROM ME.
I'M EXCITED.
ARE THERE EFFORTS ON A REGIONAL
>> QUICK QUESTIONS FROM ME.
LEVEL TO CONSOLIDATE WITH THE
ARE THERE EFFORTS ON A REGIONAL
WASHTENAW WATER COUNTY WATER
LEVEL TO CONSOLIDATE WITH THE
RESOURCE COMMISSIONERS
OFFICE?
GENERALLY WHAT I'M THINKING
OF THE STANDARDS IS BEING
REVIEWED AND MANDATED BY THE
WATER RESOURCE COMMISSIONER.
SO IS THERE A KIND OF REGIONAL
OR WATERSHED KIND OF EFFORT OR
IS THIS SPECIFIC TO THE
MUNICIPALITY BOUNDARIES?
THIS PLAN IS SPECIFIC TO THE
MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES.
THAT BEING SAID, THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR AND THE WASHINGTON
COUNTY WATER RESOURCE
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE HAVE A
VERY UNIQUE PARTNERSHIP AND WE
WORK HAND IN HAND WITH THEM ON
SO, SO MANY STORMWATER
PROJECTS.
IN FACT THE WATER THE WASHOE
COUNTY WATER RESOURCE
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE HAD A
REPRESENTATIVE ON OUR RFP
REVIEW TEAM THERE AT THE TABLE
THERE.
THEY'RE PART OF OUR ACTUAL WORK
GROUP.
SO ARE THERE GOING TO BE ANY
EFFORTS TO COORDINATE WITH
OTHER CITIES?
NOT SPECIFICALLY.
WE'RE LOOKING AT THIS IS MORE
OF AN EXAMPLE FOR OTHER GREAT
LAKES COMMUNITIES.
GOT IT.
>> ANY OTHER QUESTIONS
DISCUSSION ITEMS?
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
PRETTY MUCH, YEAH.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR PATIENCE AS
WELL.
>> OK, WE HAVE ONE LAST
REMAINING ITEM WE GET TO
PROCEED.
ALL RIGHT.
>> WE'RE GOING TO MOVE ON TO
AGENDA ITEM TEN B THIS IS THE
FISCAL YEAR TWENTY FIVE CITY
COUNCIL POLICY AGENDA FEEDBACK
.
>> WITH THAT WE WILL HAVE MR.
LEONHARDT DO THE STAFF
INTRODUCTION NOT MUCH OF AN
INTRODUCTION.
I THINK YOU DISCUSSED THIS
PREVIOUSLY.
ONE OF THE IDEAS THAT CAME OUT
OF IT WAS MAKING SURE THAT THE
CITY WAS SUPPORTIVE OF THE
PROPOSED CHANGES TO THE
BUILDING CODES THAT WE HAVE TO
ADOPT AND WE ARE NOT ABLE TO
ADOPT OUR OWN.
SO THAT WAS ONE MESSAGE THAT
WAS REFLECTED HERE.
IF YOU WANT TO ADD ANYTHING
ELSE YOU CAN THIS WOULD BE
FORWARDED TO CITY COUNCIL, A
COMMITTEE WHO ULTIMATELY I
THINK THAN IT TO THE ENTIRETY
OF THE CITY COUNCIL TO FORM
JUST A BIT OF A POLICY BASIS.
SO THAT HELPS CITY STAFF WHEN
THERE'S QUESTIONS ON
LEGISLATION TO KNOW WHAT THE
CITY'S POSITION IS.
MAYBE WE CAN SET UP TESTIMONY
OR SOMETHING ON THE BASIS OF AN
AP.
>> GOT IT.
ANY COMMENTS DISCUSSION?
OK, I GUESS SOME NOISE FOLKS.
>> FINE OK GOT IT.
WELL I DO NEED A MOVE BY
COMMISSIONER WELCH SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER MILLS.
I'M GOING TO JUST READ THE
MOTION AND OUR PLANNING
COMMISSION PROPOSES THESE ITEMS
FOR CONSIDERATION IN THE CITY
COUNCIL POLICY FOR FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY FIVE PURSUE MICHIGAN
BUILDING CODE MODIFICATIONS TO
ENHANCE SUSTAINABILITY HOUSING
OPPORTUNITIES INCLUDING
ADOPTION OF ZERO CODE RENEWABLE
ENERGY APPENDIX DISCUSSION
OF MOTION C NONE ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF THE MOTION SAY I
OPPOSED MOTION CARRIES
UNANIMOUSLY WE'RE TO MOVE ON TO
AGENDA ITEM ELEVEN.
THIS IS PUBLIC COMMENT THIS IS
THE SECOND OPPORTUNITY FOR
INDIVIDUALS TO SPEAK UP TO
THREE MINUTES ON ANY ISSUE.
WE WILL FIRST HEAR FROM THOSE
PRESENT AND THEN REMOTE
PARTICIPANTS TO SPEAK REMOTELY
.
PLEASE PRESS NINE IF ON THE
PHONE OR USE A RAISE HANDPHONE
FUNCTION IN ZOM FOR PHONE
ACCESS PLEASE CALL EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND UNDER MEETING ID
NINE SEVEN SEVEN SIX SIX THREE
FOUR ONE TO DO SIX CITY STAFF
WILL IDENTIFY CALLERS BY THE
LAST THREE THE PHONE NUMBER OR
BY NAME IF AVAILABLE YOU'LL
HEAR AN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT
WHEN IT'S YOUR TIME TO SPEAK
AND PLEASE ENSURE THAT YOU'RE
IN A QUIET AREA MUTE ANY
BACKGROUND NOISE FOR ALL
PARTICIPANTS AGAIN PLEASE NAME
PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS THE BEGINNING OF THE
COMMENTS.
>> DO WE HAVE ANY PRESENT I DO
NOT SEE THERE'S NOBODY BEHIND
LIKE THE OK OK IS THERE IS
THERE ANYBODY WHO WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS COMMISSION REMOTELY?
>> NOT AT THIS TIME.
OK I'M GOING TO GIVE IT JUST AS
PER USUAL WITH THAT I WILL
CLOSE PUBLIC COMMENT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
WE'RE ONTO THE AGENDA ITEM
TWELVE IS THERE ANY COMMISSION
PROPOSED BUSINESS?
I JUST WANT TO THANK ALL OF YOU
FOR BEING TROUPERS THROUGH THE
FIRST MEETING OF TWENTY TWENTY
FIVE.
SO THANK YOU
.
>> WITH THAT WE'RE COULD GO
THROUGH OUR FINAL ITEM WHICH IS
A GERMAN MOVE BY COMMITTEE
COUNCIL MEMBER JUST SECONDED BY
COMMISSIONER WHETHER IT BE ALL
THOSE IN FAVOR SAY I I WE ARE
ADJOURNED.
THANK YOU